! Allow those mistakes to be your friend and teach you.
"Children experience the world with their whole being
"Once open, what salary scale described in the ECE Funding Handbook will your service be using to determine the minimum salaries paid to all employed ECE and primary qualified certificated teachers?"
"The emphasis on creating positive experiences in maths was a real takeaway for me. The facilitator made it easy to understand, and you felt supported by the resources, material, and PLD that is out there."
"The materials and resources shared were excellent."
"the Minister 'may' set fees relating to international fee-paying students".
"the Minister 'must' set fees relating to international fee-paying students" to
$ per funded child hour (including GST)
$ per targeted hour (including GST)
$1.5 billion for education property
$13 million over 4 years to provide sustainable funding to playcentres.
$14 million over 4 years to support the ongoing delivery of period products in schools programme
$15 million over 4 years to increase funding for the School High Health Needs Fund
$163 million over 4 years to support digital services in schools, including cyber security and equipment replacement
$191 million over 4 years for a cost adjustment of 2% to the Early Childhood Education (ECE) subsidy for under 2-year-olds, ECE subsidy for 2-year-olds and over, 20 Hours ECE, and Equity Funding
$199 million over 4 years including a 3% increase for Schools Equity and Isolation Index based components and a 2.5% increase for the remaining components of school operating grants
$32 million for Holidays Act remediation for school employees, based on an updated estimate of liability
$398 for each subsequent child.
$429 million of operating funding over 4 years will be redirected to frontline areas within education.
$45 million over 4 years to support the rapid increase in numbers of students that require English for speakers of other languages (ESOL) support
$53 million over 4 years for teacher supply, retention and attraction initiatives
$557 for your third child
$67 million over 4 years for the implementation of structured literacy in all state primary schools
$677 for your second child
$796 for your first child
' to describe the day-to-day, collective weaving of curriculum for our
'Eco' or 'natural' cleaners
'Generative artificial intelligence' is a term that covers a range of tools that have been trained using huge sets of data to create new content. It is also called 'AI' and 'GenAI'.
'Kaupapa funding' (ECE funding subsidy) quality funding rate requirement
'Other teachers' and other teacher hours
'cause I was a, a deputy principal at a,
'cause a lot of these are very self-explanatory is,
'cause this has been communicated via
'cause we don't wanna disadvantage isolated communities.
(A computer screen appears showing an Excel worksheet for Kiwi Park School 2020 the statement of comprehensive revenue and expense)
(A computer screen appears showing an Excel worksheet for Kiwi Park School 2020)
(A computer screen appears with a bold blue coloured rectangle drawn around the cells H10 to K10)
(A computer screen appears with a bold blue coloured rectangle drawn around the cells H54 to K54)
(Acting Deputy Secretary)
(Actor, facing and talking into the camera)
(An Excel screen appears on screen: the user copies and paste GL codes from one worksheet to the next worksheet until all codes are mapped (pause). The user also checks the Excel screen for any error messages):
(An Excel screen appears)
(An Excel spreadsheet appears on screen - the user selects the Statement of Cash Flows; the user scrolls down the screen and moves the mouse to cell i47 to K47)
(Chad Britton continues to present from power point presentation)
(Chad continues to present from power point presentation)
(GMA3 Parent involvement).
(Hamish Anton continues to present from power point presentation)
(Jane Rogers continues to present from power point presentation)
(MPI) has developed some Food Safe guidance including a Food Safety Factsheet, as well as providing tips for food safety. Check out also food safety rules on MPI website.
(MPI) has developed some food safety guidance and fact sheets for services, as well as providing tips for food safety.
(Note: see the Human Rights Act 1993 to ensure there is no discrimination in items listed in the person specifications.)
(On screen a bold blue rectangle is drawn around cells S 164 to S172, the rectangle scrolls down to cells S177 to S184)
(On screen a bold blue rectangle is drawn around cells S 164 to S184, the user attention is also drawn, by drawing a bold blue rectangle around the sum function at the bottom of the screen)
(On screen a bold blue rectangle is drawn around cells S 88, the rectangle then scrolls down to cell S97)
(On screen a bold blue rectangle is drawn around cells around cell S 168 and scrolls down to S179. A bold blue rectangle is drawn around cell S 97 and the rectangle moves across to T 97 and then D97)
(On screen a bold blue rectangle is drawn around cells around cell S169 and then around S181. The user attention is also drawn to the automatic sum function of excel at the bottom the screen. A bold blue rectangle is drawn around cell T 88 to show the calculated receipt from the disposal. The cursor then scrolls over to Cell D88 to show the surplus on disposal).
(On screen a bold blue rectangle is drawn around cells around cell T88)
(On screen the cursor highlights Q 171, [pause], the cursor scrolls down to Q234)
(On screen the cursor scrolls from column T to column Ai, a bold blue rectangle is drawn around cells Ai 88 Ai 97)
(On screen the user highlights Column H, pause. The user moves the cursor to H10 and H75)
(On screen the user moves the cursor to Columns Q, R and S and scrolls down to S88)
(On screen the user selects the Actual CF Model CY and Budget CF Model CY worksheet, the user scrolls down the worksheets and moves the mouse to row 263)
(Policies) under the stewardship of the
(Provisionally Certificated Teachers) are proactively supported to become fully certificated.
(Starting power point presentation)
(The screen shows the user selecting the red coloured Title Page, scrolls over to and clicks on the Notes and Disclosures worksheet. The user selects File, Print, Printer. The user then ungroups the selected worksheets, closes and saves the spreadsheet).
(The video is divided in 2 sections, on the left hand-side, the presenter is standing, facing the camera. On the right hand-side, the powerpoint presentation is showing the webinar's title 'Managing School Finances Annual Reporting')
(emotional). Kaiako draw on their wide knowledge of each child to make meaning of their observations and plan for next steps.
(formerly New Zealand School Trustees Association) can also provide you with support to manage actual or suspected abuse or neglect, safety checking and child protection policies.
(formerly New Zealand School Trustees Association):
(formerly the New Zealand School Trustees Association) has a sample child protection policy and more information.
(i.e., in monthly instalments). This payment must be paid as an additional payment on top of the certificated
(no more than 2) to any teacher.
(on the computer screen the user selects the Statement of Comprehensive Revenue and Expense, scrolls over to and clicks on the Notes and Disclosures worksheet)
(on the computer screen the user selects the relevant cells in Column D and enters an explanation for the Note disclosure in cells D51 and D205)
(only 1) can be allocated on a fixed-term basis, in area schools with less than 4 allowances.
(only 1) can be allocated to teachers without salary units who have curriculum or pastoral management responsibilities, in area schools with less than 7 allowances.
(only 1) to teachers with 5 salary units who have designated curriculum or pastoral management responsibilities.
(the computer image on screen has drawn a bold blue boarder around the Annual Reporting Circular hyperlink on the webpage)
(the computer image on screen shows a user scrolling down the webpage)
(the computer screen highlights the cells on line 4 by a bold blue coloured rectangle)
(the next computer image shows a user reading the Education Circular - Filing your Annual Report)
(up to 20%) can be allocated to teachers without salary units who have curriculum or pastoral management responsibilities, in area schools with 7 or more allowances.
(up to 20%) to teachers without salary units who have designated curriculum or pastoral management responsibilities.
(up to 40%) can be allocated on a fixed-term basis, in area schools with 4 or more allowances.
(up to 40%) can be allocated on a fixed-term basis.
) is aligned with the Professional Growth Cycle for Teachers as required by the Teaching Council of
) need to decide which pathway to implement either:
) that are used on a regular basis in New Zealand society.
), updated roll data (July 2023), information about gaps in education pathways, and opportunities to grow and strengthen the
, Education New Zealand, Education Review Office (ERO), New Zealand Qualifications Authority (NZQA), The Teaching Council of
, NZQA, and the Tertiary Education Commission.
, National Public Health Service, Greater Wellington Region.
, a mana enhancing process for children, parents and
, and communities hold. It is therefore vital that
, and life contexts (documented and undocumented).
, and other education providers
, and others in the community.
, and post-secondary education providers.
, and students, to help prevent bullying.
, and the community are encouraged to participate in and contribute to the curriculum.
, and the wider community. An environment that is safe, respectful, and welcoming will encourage
, and to seek a living wage for all other ECE staff.
, any previous experience as an uncertificated
, as well as Pacifica languages and Polynesian cultures.
, based on the total number of hours they are employed for.
, but no Level 1 schooling provision. Other catchments in the country have Level 1 education available to Year 8, with no secondary provision. And some catchments have no Level 1 education at all.
, but they do not get government funding.
, caregivers or any other visitors.
, choose the type you are starting.
, communities, and government agencies to work together to support and make sure students are attending school regularly. Regular attendance means the student is present for more than 90% of the term.
, community rooms, or school sites. Think about how spaces can be used to give children a range of different activities and experiences to choose from and support adults to play with the children.
, cultural playgroups and community language playgroups.
, each service should develop processes for assessment, planning and evaluation.
, each service should develop processes for assessment, planning, and evaluation.
, early learning services,
, educators and coordinators, and communities hold. It is therefore vital that, educators, coordinators, parents and
, educators, and coordinators?
, employed in a non-teaching role, engages in a teaching role regularly, for example to regularly cover breaks, they are eligible to receive the allowance for all hours they are engaged in a teaching role.
, engaged regarding the range of experiences and opportunities that are provided?
, explains that everything we do has an impact on learning and teaching. We use the term '
, for each gazetted school day. We also provide a per-student amount to cover administration costs.
, formerly the Correspondence School, offers learning programmes for
, how do we acknowledge this and show it has been heard and implemented when working with their child?
, in this context, means to carry or to uplift, to raise up. It is also a person's mouth, voice, and the action of speaking.
, including narrative, song, art and movement.
, management committees/staff.
, management, families, and
, or Communities of Learning, bring together education and training providers with the aim of helping students to achieve their full potential.
, or other adults who have a designated role of providing education and care to children at a service and are included in required adult:child ratios.
, or the nearest school bus route.
, relationships should be recognised as a source of learning, empowerment, and identity for all.
, relationships should be recognised as a source of learning, empowerment, and identity for all. Educators, coordinators, and service leaders have a responsibility to engage in responsive, respectful relationships with children, parents and
, state schools that teach in
, teachers, supervisors, parent helpers,
, teaching practice, assessment, and curriculum planning should demonstrate that
, the allowances are different:
, the collective of the 3 statutorily recognised
, the community, and children share with each other their understandings of social and emotional competence.
, the curriculum should be developed in partnership with
, they encourage mokopuna to engage in
, to carry out their work in
, use the Conditions of contract for consultancy services along with the Form of agreement and special conditions. The guidance note provides more information on this.
, who aspire to provide a full immersion environment for
, whose language is different to the predominant language used at the service?
, years of experience must be counted as:
, you can request an out-of-cycle review of your funding. You can only request 1 out-of-cycle funding review every 2 years and it must be at least 6 months since the latest March funding review.
, you must follow your child protection policy and other reporting requirements.
, you need to meet certain criteria. This could be living far away from your nearest early learning service.
- Build a culture of care.
-based or that affiliates with
-led ECE services. These services must meet the requirements of the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008.
-led centres like Playcentre or playgroups generally cost less than teacher-led centres.
-led service funded at the quality rate when a qualified reliever is not available to replace a qualified parent or
-led services must meet the record keeping requirements set out in Section 11-1.
-led services receiving quality funding rates.
-led services that receive quality level funding must meet the record keeping requirements described in Section 3-C-2.
-led services that wish to become eligible for funding at the quality rates must meet the requirements of the relevant quality rate options.
. Any funding changes take effect from Quarter 2 (April).
. Children are given the opportunity to develop knowledge and an understanding of the cultural heritages of both parties to
. Educators and coordinators should seek to develop mutually positive relationships with mokopuna and to work with parents and
. English is used as a temporary language. Not all
. If you do not have one, ask your school's ESL delegated authoriser to create one for you.
. It is used 81% or more of the time. It is expected that
. More information about the curriculum framework can be found on the
. Note that this licence doesn't apply to logos, emblems, trademarks or design elements. These specific items may not be re-used without express permission.
. Others have a specific set of beliefs about teaching and learning, for example, Rudolf Steiner and Montessori.
. Playcentres receive government funding, but may charge a fee or ask for a donation to meet extra costs. They cost less to attend than other services.
. Reviewing experiences and opportunities is a way of doing this.
. So, we can collectively support all students to achieve. This will mean:
. Some services set a minimum number of hours for a child to attend. For example, you might have to enrol your child for at least 7 hours a day and there will be a cost for the last hour of each day.
. The Ministry of Education provides more information on job descriptions.
. The framework describes in broad terms what is seen as important learning for children as well as the kinds of environments in which this learning can occur.
. The governing bodies of these places of learning will use these priorities, alongside their own local priorities and delivering a rich local curriculum, to help every child and young person to progress and achieve to their potential.
. The school board can also propose changes.
. The way we weave together the distinct pattern of our curriculum defines what we do and how we do it.
. There are also playgroups in Pasifika languages and cultures.
. These approaches can be actioned across early learning, schooling and tertiary education.
. These options are outlined in the specific section for that service type.
. They may work with groups of teachers, with school leaders, or directly with students to support learning and behaviour needs.
. They should contribute their expert knowledge of children's capabilities and interests at home, in other settings and the early learning service.
. They should contribute their expert knowledge of children's capabilities and interests at home, in other settings, and the early learning service.
. This has recently been refreshed, and is available on Education Counts:
. This may include specialist support and, in some instances, paraprofessional support, which will include capability development for teachers and other adults involved.
. This research aligns with the goals of the
. This version includes more information about early learning (
. We aim to support schools and
. We have also learnt from the
. What strategies can we put in place to build our capability? How will we demonstrate this knowledge in action in the environment?
. Where the service provider is not
. You must check that a student meets the transport assistance eligibility criteria before they use this service.
/Assessment for Learning: Early Childhood Exemplars is a best-practice guide that will help teachers continue to improve the quality of their teaching.
/Mt Wellington Residential School.
/Mt Wellington Residential School. The rapid payment process offers an extra, faster option for redress for claimants who attended
/Mt Wellington. You can see the amounts in the rapid payments information sheet above)
0-24% certificated teachers
0.50% for other providers, such as universities.
0.89% (excluding GST) of the tuition fees received from international students each trimester for PTEs
1 April operational funding instalment
1 January operational funding instalment
1 July operational funding instalment
1 October operational funding instalment
1 The Terrace, Mezzanine floor
1 half day that ends before noon, and
1 half day that starts after noon.
1 more adult (of the supervising adults, 1 is a first aider).
1 person in the final year of
1 person in the final year of the
1 session or day per week
1 to 4 days (average about 2 days)
1 week from appearance of rash, or until all blisters have dried
1-1 How the handbook works
1-3 Quick reference directions
1. Authorised signatories are linked with only one electronic signature. The means of creating each individual electronic signature is linked only to its authorised signatory or any system administrators and to no other person.
1. Key Shift 1: Work reciprocally with diverse Pacific communities to respond to unmet needs, including growing and supporting Pacific bilingual and immersion education pathways.
1. verification of identity (including previous identities)
1. verification of identity (including previous identities),
10 October 2024 - Freedom of speech in the tertiary education system
10 Year Property Plan steps for schools
10 to 21 days after being exposed
10-1 What is equity funding?
10-2 Component A: Low socio-economic communities
10-3 Component B: Special needs and non-English speaking backgrounds
10-4 Component C: Language and culture other than English (including sign language)
10-5 Component D: Isolation
10. Electronic attendance records must be retained for 7 years without any loss of integrity.
100% certificated teachers
100-104 Stuart Street, Dunedin
11 October 2024 - ITP policy decisions
11 hours and 35 minutes can be rounded to 12 hours.
11-1 Record keeping requirements
11-2 Funding claim audits and record keeping audits
11. All records are readily accessible so as to be usable for subsequent inspection by Ministry staff as required.
12 June 2024 - Regulatory Impact Statement
12-1 Financial reporting: general information
12-18 Normanby Rd, Auckland
12-18 Normanby Road, Auckland
12-2 Types of financial reports
12-2: Types of financial reports
12-3 Reporting requirements for targeted funding
12-4 Auditing financial reports
12. All records can be extracted into an appropriate format for reporting purposes.
13-1 What is Targeted Funding for Disadvantage?
13-2 Eligibility for Targeted Funding
13-3 How to use Targeted Funding
13-4 Reporting requirements for Targeted Funding
14 April 2025 - A Redesigned Vocational Education and Training System: Options for Workbased Learning
14-1 Attendance and enrolment data
14-3 Early learning information (ELI) system
15 January 2024 - Progressing changes to vocational education and training funding for 2025
15 May 2024 - Further revisions to the June Cabinet paper outline, and supporting material
15 November 2024 - Draft University Freedom of Speech Cabinet Paper
18 December 2024 - Vet Legislative framework
19 December 2023 - Legislation and establishment timeline for vocational education entities
19 Home Straight Rd, Hamilton
2 Playcentre Practice (course 4 of The Playcentre Diploma in Early Childhood and Adult Education).
2 and Overs not receiving 20 Hours ECE
2 level 4 qualifications recognised in the NZ Gazette.
2 signatories on the RS3 form and
2 subject or specialist level 7 qualifications on the NZQF (as listed above) or
2 to 10 days (usually 3 to 4 days)
2-1 The link between licensing and funding
2-3 Other sources of ECE funding
2-4 When and how funding is paid
2-4: When and how funding is paid
2-5 The link between costs and funding rates
2-7 Recovery of early childhood education funding
2-way contact with parents or caregivers (that is, you can call them, and they can call you)
2-way contact with parents or caregivers (that is, you can call them, and they can call you).
2. If usernames and passwords are used, the system must record who created them and when they were created.
2. Key Shift 2: Confront systemic racism and discrimination in education.
2.5 hours will be claimed as 20 Hours ECE hours and 0.5 hours claimed as Plus 10 ECE hours.
20 Hours ECE Hours are the fully subsidised hours that the child receives.
20 Hours ECE enables services to provide early childhood education to 3-year-olds, 4-year-olds and 5-year-olds for up to a maximum of 6 hours per child per day and 20 hours per child per week without charging fees.
20 Hours ECE funding can only be claimed for children who fill a child-place and are 3, 4 or 5 years of age.
20 Hours ECE funding includes both the 20 Hours ECE hours and the Plus 10 ECE hours.
20 Hours ECE funding is based on the child rather than the place they occupy in the service.
20 Hours ECE funding is paid three times a year, along with the ECE Funding Subsidy.
20 Hours ECE hours are funded at a higher level because they are intended to meet the full average cost of providing ECE for each service type.
20 Hours ECE hours are funded at a higher level to cover the full cost of providing ECE.
20 Hours ECE hours are the funded child hours that services can claim per eligible child for the provision of 20 Hours ECE.
20 Hours ECE hours are the hours you would claim for 3-year-olds, 4-year-olds and 5-year-olds. The signed attestation part of the enrolment agreement must be completed for each child.
20 Hours ECE hours claimed
20 Hours ECE hours may be claimed for the first 2.5 hours. Services must claim Plus 10 ECE hours for the remaining half hour.
20 Hours ECE hours must only be claimed for up to 20 hours per week for each child.
20 Hours ECE is a higher rate of funding than the ECE Funding Subsidy for three-year-olds, four-year-olds and five-year-olds for up to a maximum of six hours per child per day and 20 hours per week.
20 Hours Early Childhood Education (ECE) is a higher rate of funding for services to cover the average full cost of providing early childhood education.
20 Hours Early Childhood Education (ECE) is a higher rate of funding than the ECE Subsidy.
20 hours funding for early childhood education
20 hours per week for 20 Hours ECE per eligible child
2021 background documents
2022 background documents
2023 background documents
2024 Kiwi Park group accounts model blank
2024 Kiwi Park group annual financial statement model
2024 Kiwi Park group model accounts
2024 Kiwi Park single model accounts
2024 Kiwi Park single model accounts blank
2024 Kiwi Park single school annual financial statement model
2024 Vocational Education and Training reforms
2024 to support discussions about growing this provision.
2025 Work-based learning reforms targeted consultation
2025 staffing and funding cycle
2025-2026 cohort entry dates
2030 will be regularly reviewed to consider wider changes occurring in the system. Reviews will consider if the strategy:
21 June 2024 - Overview of proposed new Vocational Education and Training system
21 May 2024 - Proposed funding settings for vocational education and training
22 November 2024 - Further advice on freedom of speech
24 May 2024 - Arrangement and Delivery in Industry Training
25 January 2024 - Vocational education and training redesign: Work-based learning
25-49% certificated teachers
26 July 2024 - VET consultation comms pack and final changes to Consultation document
28(2)(a): Person responsible (Co-ordinator/ visiting teacher) to contact each educator engaged in the service at least once every 2 weeks.
28(2)(b): Person responsible (Co-ordinator/ visiting teacher) to visit each educator at least once per month.
28(2)(c ) take all reasonable steps each month to observe each child participating in the service while they are receiving education and care
29 July 2024 - Official Information Act Request 1342924 Appendix One
2FA adds an extra verification step to access an account or network.
2FA typically requires 2 of the following:
2a09:bac1:5b60:20::278:88
3 December 2024 - University Freedom of Speech Cabinet paper for lodgment
3 July 2024 - Vocational education and training reforms - Revised consultation document and further advice
3 levels of our education system
3(c): definition of person responsible and their responsibilities.
3-A Information for all services
3-A-1 Funding eligibility
3-A: Information for all services
3-B-1 The link between teacher certification and funding
3-B-2 Education and care services
3-B-3 Hospital-based services
3-B-4 Home-based ECE services
3. If usernames and passwords are used, there must be adequate controls to ensure that these are not used by anyone other than the linked authorised signatory.
3. Key Shift 3: Enable every teacher, leader and educational professional to take coordinated action to become culturally competent with diverse Pacific learners.
30 January 2024 - Vocational Education and Training: Two stage legislation process and ITPs
30 hours per week for 20 Hours ECE and Plus 10 per eligible child.
31 December: End of financial year for all schools and
31 March: Due date for submitting annual financial statements to the auditor.
31 March: Final date for submitting the board-approved draft financial statements to the auditor.
31 May: Due date for submitting annual report (including the annual financial statements) to us.
31 May: The board submits the annual report, including the audited financial statements, to us.
380 for secondary and composite schools.
386 for primary, intermediate and specialist schools
4 June 2024 - Draft Cabinet paper for Ministerial consultation: Consultation options for Vocational Education and Training Reforms
4 November 2024 - University Freedom of Speech Legislation
4 to 6 weeks (but if had scabies before it may develop within 1 to 4 days)
4, 5, 6 and 7 are examples of templates or frameworks of varying degrees of detail and complexity for groups to record what experiences and opportunities have been/will be provided on a weekly, monthly or term basis.
4-3 Fees, donations, optional charges and home-based educator top up payments
4-5 Beginning or ceasing to offer 20 Hours ECE Funding
4. Key Shift 4: Partner with families to design education opportunities together with teachers, leaders and educational professionals so aspirations for learning and employment can be met.
4. Only a parent or guardian who is an authorised signatory can verify attendance records electronically. A parent or guardian must only use their own electronic signature to verify attendance records.
4.0 New Zealand licence, unless otherwise indicated for specific items.
4.5 hours on Thursday and Friday
44(1)(d)(i): The person responsible must supervise children and educators at all times children attend the service and
47: Governance, management, and administration standard.
48 Hereford Street, Christchurch
5 April 2024 - Annotated Agenda: Options for advancing the VET system redesign
5 July 2024 - Vocational education and training redesign consultation document
5 days after the appearance of rash. Non-immune contacts of a case may be excluded.
5 days from commencing antibiotic treatment, or
5 sessions or days per week.
5-1 Annual Top-Up for Isolated Services
5-2 Support Grant for Provisionally Registered Teachers
5-3 Allowance for teachers in bilingual or immersion services
5-3-2 Allowances for teachers in Pacific bilingual and immersion education and care services
5. Any alteration made to any information, is evident (including who made the changes and when). This includes alterations to electronic signatures and confirmation of attendance. This also includes daily sign in and out if it is used.
5. Key Shift 5: Grow, retain and value highly competent teachers, leaders and educational professionals of diverse Pacific heritages.
5. information from any relevant professional organisation or registration body
5. information from any relevant professional organisation or registration body,
50% qualified licensing requirements
50-79% certificated teachers
6 September 2024 - Vocational Education and Training Redesign: Further considerations for ITPs and proposed federation
6 hours funding per day for 20 Hours ECE and/or Plus 10 per eligible child
6 hours on Monday and Tuesday
6-2 Conditional enrolment
6-5 Three Week Rule for Continuous Absence
6-6 Three Week Rule: extension for extended non-operation
6-7 The Frequent Absence Rule
6-8 The Frequent Absence Rule - Examples
6-9 Funding for make-up days
6. The verification process must:
6. a New Zealand police vet and
6. a New Zealand police vet, and
62(1): A person responsible for a licensed home-based education and care service must take all reasonable steps to observe, support, and provide guidance on the implementation of the prescribed curriculum framework by the service and keep records of these activities; and provide professional development to educators on a regular basis and keep records of any such activity.
7 November 2024 - Further Advice on University Freedom of Speech Legislation
7 days from the onset of jaundice
7-1 Funding for new services
7-2 Completing the RS3 form
7-5-1 Centre-based emergency closure
7-5-2 Home-based emergency closure
7-7 Absence rule exemptions
7-8 Transitional school visits
7-9 The EC20 transitional advance form
75% of this total is paid as the advance payment (or 100% for kindergartens).
8 March 2024 - VET re-design engagement and communications plan
8 October 2024 - VET consultation Summary of Submissions report
8 hours on Monday and Tuesday
8 hours on Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday
8-1 Changing bank account details
8-2 Change of service provider
8-3 When your service is closing
8. If a service uses daily electronic sign in and out then the system must record who signed the child in and out, and what day and time this happened. It is recommended that only authorised signatories sign a child in or out.
80-99% certificated teachers
9 April 2025 - Official Information Act Request 1342924 Response
9 August 2024 - Vocational Education and Training ITP federation: fundamental settings
9-2 Calculating the ECE Funding Subsidy
9-3 Calculating 20 Hours ECE funding
9-4 Calculating the staff hour count
9-5 Calculating advance days
9-7 Claiming the support grant for provisionally registered teachers
9-8 Monitoring progress: Teacher registration
9-9 Monitoring progress: Number of children
: the current state of the language, the demographics of the population, and their relationship to Aotearoa.
? How do we evaluate the effectiveness of these?
? How do we measure this?
? How is it reflected in our service?
? How is this visible within our environment?
? How will we explore the histories of this place?
? In what ways is this affirmed?
? Think about parents and
? What strategies can we put in place to build our capability? How will we demonstrate this knowledge in action in the environment?
A 2-stage open tender involves requesting registrations of interest from suppliers so you can make a shortlist. You then invite only shortlisted suppliers to prepare a full offer. This is appropriate for large procurements and when 10 or more suppliers are likely to bid for the contract.
A Pacific bilingual service where:
A Pacific immersion service where:
A Police vet is valid for 3 years.
A Police vet must be updated by the employer at least every 3 years.
A barrier is a circumstance that prevents students from achieving in and attending school or
A bleach solution may also be the most suitable to disinfect the nappy changing area, toilets and sinks. To work properly the solution needs to:
A brief explanation of the audit process and what the auditor has done to be able to give an opinion.
A budget of income and expenditure should be broken down on a monthly basis.
A bus code of conduct sets out expectations and consequences for behaviour on school transport. It should be signed by the student, their caregiver, the school, and the transport service provider.
A bus procedure can help clarify behaviour expectations for students. You can use it to set out the specific roles and responsibilities for your school staff and transport service providers.
A caregiver may want to request a review of a SESTA decision. A review might be needed if:
A category of early childhood education services where one or more qualified teachers are responsible for the overall programme in the service. They are required to have a person responsible (or home-based care coordinator) who is a qualified, certificated, teacher.
A category of early childhood services that:
A centre with several small rooms, none of which is large enough for group activities, or a centre with a very long and thin outdoor space that could severely restrict the kinds of outdoor activities that could be provided would not meet the criterion.
A certificate issued by the Teaching Council of Aotearoa, New Zealand. Holders of a current practising certificate are legally able to teach in New Zealand.
A certificated playgroup is a group that has met the curriculum, ratio, premises and facilities, health and safety practices, and administration standards set in the Education (Playgroups) Regulations 2008
A certificated teacher must hold an early childhood education teaching or New Zealand qualified primary teacher qualification.
A certificated teacher should progress 1 salary step when they have:
A certified copy is a photocopy that has been stamped or endorsed by a person who confirms that the copy is a true copy of the original document. Certified copies from previous employers or organisations cannot be relied on. This means you will need to see the original qualification before you can certify a copy.
A checklist of the key steps in the emergency drill, whether or not they were completed, and any comments.
A child can receive a maximum of six 20 Hours ECE hours per day and twenty 20 Hours ECE hours per week as a total across all services.
A child protection policy outlines how your service will:
A child will qualify for an exemption from the absence rules if:
A code of conduct sets out expectations and consequences for behaviour on school transport. It should be signed by the transport service provider, students, their caregivers, and their school.
A communication plan for families and support services.
A complainant may be a current or past parent of the service, a current or past staff member or a member of the public.
A conflict of interest can be actual, potential or perceived:
A conflict of interest is when your personal interests, obligations or relationships could influence, or could be perceived to influence, decisions you make on your school's behalf.
A conflict of interest might be a connection you have with a business or individual your school might buy something from. Some examples are:
A contact person who can respond and assist easily if any unforeseen incident occurs? (for example, available to ring ambulance, talk with police and so on)
A copy of the Funding Rate Table can be found in Appendix 1 and will be updated each time there is a change to the rates.
A copy of the criteria can be downloaded below.
A copy of the current certificate issued to the hospital under the Health and Disability Services (Safety) Act 2001 is required to be held by the service.
A copy of the notification sent to the specified agency is required to be sent to the Ministry of Education.
A copy of the notification sent to the specified agency.
A cot is designed for infants and is enclosed on all four sides so the infant cannot fall out. A cot is only suitable for infants who are able to be lifted out.
A crown entity established under the Education Act (1989) and is continued under the Education and Training Act 2020. Its functions include:
A current driver licence or passport. A passport is required for anyone currently residing overseas.
A current fire evacuation scheme approved by Fire and Emergency New Zealand.
A current practising certificate issued by the Teaching Council
A curriculum that is inclusive ensures all children know that the early childhood service they attend is a place where they belong and where they feel valued for who they are.
A day or hours for which your service is not usually licensed to operate, but for which special permission has been obtained from a Ministry local office to open, in place of opening on a licensed day.
A day that an enrolled child is not normally enrolled to attend but attends in place of an absent child.
A declaration that details what salary scale all employed ECE and primary qualified certificated teachers' minimum salaries services will be paying.
A designated space is available to support the provision of restful sleep for children under the age of 2 at any time they are attending.
A designated space is available to support the provision of restful sleep for children under the age of 2 at any time they are attending. This space is located and designed to:
A detailed record of each component of the safety check must be kept, and the date on which each step was taken must be recorded, including the date of the risk assessment required to be completed after all relevant information is obtained.
A discretionary hour is an hour that a service can claim an Other Teacher as a Certificated Teacher for the purposes of the Staff Hour Count.
A discretionary situation may be either a session or a full day of operation depending on the operating structure of the service.
A document issued by the Ministry of Education detailing the hours during which an early childhood education service may operate, and the maximum number of child-places the service may fill.
A documented risk management system.
A documented sleep procedure ensures a consistent approach by adults at the service to how they monitor the safety and wellbeing of children while sleeping. It will clearly outline the roles and responsibilities of the adults at the service when children are sleeping.
A documented sleep procedure ensures that there is a consistent approach by educators to monitor the safety and wellbeing of children while sleeping. It will clearly outline the roles and responsibilities of the educator when children are sleeping.
A donation is a voluntary payment. There is no obligation to pay and no enforcement of payment.
A donation is a voluntary payment. There is no obligation to pay and there is no enforcement of payment.
A family member is any member of the family other than the parent or caregiver of the child. Please refer to the section Funding Claim Exceptions for more information.
A fee is a payment that is required as a condition of enrolment and can be enforced.
A fee is a payment that is required as a condition of enrolment and can be enforced. It excludes home-based educator top up payments but includes any other compulsory payment regardless of the type: wages, salary or any other payments made by the parents/caregivers to either the educator or the service provider.
A form showing the actual hours worked daily by regulated (ratio) staff in an education and care service.
A formal written report will be sent to the service provider contact person.
A fridge is the most practical way of storing perishable food and drink at a safe temperature and for keeping it protected from vermin and insects. The fridge should be large enough to store perishable food (including food brought by children) and any medication that requires refrigeration.
A full allowance is based on a certificated
A full allowance is based on a certificated teacher being employed for a 40-hour week, 2,080 hours a year. The allowance does not increase if a certificated teacher works more than 2,080 hours.
A general purpose financial report should include:
A goal-directed, interrelated series of actions, events, procedures or steps.
A goal-directed, interrelated series of actions, events, procedures, or steps.
A good business practice for community groups wanting to start a new ECE service (e.g. a university or church) is to open a separate bank account for the ECE service.
A good place to start is looking at what is available in your area.
A grandparenting clause enables siblings of current students to retain the right to enrol at the same school when the new enrolment scheme is introduced or amended, as long as other criteria are met. For example, in the case of an amended scheme, at the time of enrolment the student must live inside the home zone as it was before it was amended.
A great way to choose an early learning centre,
A guide for groups sharing learning support information
A half day is being open for instruction for a minimum of 2 hours.
A hazard is a situation or thing that has the potential to cause death, injury or illness to a person.
A higher set of funding rates available to education and care services and hospital-based services who pay all employed certificated teachers according to the salary scales described Appendix 4. This includes Parity, Extended and Full parity funding rates.
A holder of a Teaching Council approved teaching qualification who has been registered by the Teaching Council. Note: A teacher must hold a current practising certificate to be able to teach.
A home in which education and care is to be provided, and its associated outdoor space.
A home-based education and care service.
A home-based service can only claim funding for the child who is a family member for the hours a child who is not a family member attends the home.
A hospital-based education and care service.
A key aspect of promoting health and safety of everyone at the playgroup is hazard management. A hazard is any activity, situation or substance that can cause harm. Harm can be injury, illness or both.
A key aspect of promoting the health and safety of everyone at the service is hazard and risk management.
A key aspect of promoting the health and safety of everyone in the home-based setting is hazard and risk management.
A key feature of playgroups is the high ratio of adults to children.
A level 4 or above in early childhood qualification recognised in the NZ Gazette notice as suitable for a person responsible in Playcentres.
A level 4 qualification recognised in the NZ Gazette, and
A level 5 qualification recognised in the NZ Gazette, and
A level 6 qualification recognised in the NZ Gazette, and
A list of all children plus their emergency contact details in case of any accident of emergency. Include any siblings. Use this to take periodic roll checks.
A list of all children plus their emergency contact details in case of any accident of emergency. Use this to take periodic roll checks when on a combined outing with other educators and children.
A list of all children plus their emergency contact details in case of any accident of emergency. Use this to take periodic roll checks.
A list of approved NZ teaching qualifications is available on the Education Workforce website.
A list of first aid kit contents can be found in Appendix 1 (note that this is the minimum requirement). The first aid kit should be stored in a place where it is readily available to adults, but is secure and out of reach of children.
A list of first aid kit contents can be found in Appendix 1: First aid kit requirements for criterion PF28.
A list of safety and emergency supplies and resources sufficient for the age and number of children and adults at the playgroup and details of how these will be maintained and accessed in an emergency.
A list of safety and emergency supplies and resources sufficient for the age and number of children and adults at the service and details of how these will be maintained and accessed in an emergency.
A list of safety and emergency supplies and resources sufficient for the age and number of children and adults present in the home and details of how these will be maintained and accessed in an emergency.
A list of safety emergency supplies and resources sufficient for the age and number of children and adults at the service and details of how these will be maintained and accessed in an emergency.
A marriage, birth or dissolution of marriage certificate if your name has changed during the period stated.
A material which does not allow water to pass through it.
A maximum of 6 hours per day and 30 hours per week of funding can be claimed per child.
A middle management allowance may be available for a teacher who has specific curriculum or pastoral management responsibility. This could be a head of department or dean, or responsibility for at least 5 students funded under the Ongoing Resourcing Scheme.
A mixed service is a service licensed to offer a combination of all day and sessional provision.
A mobile phone is sufficient to meet the criterion so long as parents are happy to call a mobile number and, if pre-paid, it is kept charged with credit so the educator can make calls.
A mobile phone is sufficient to meet the criterion so long as parents are happy to call a mobile number.
A mobility need may be due to challenges such as:
A moveable step and/or a toilet seat insert can be helpful for young children just learning to use a toilet. They can also be easily removed when an adult needs to use the toilet.
A moveable step, and/or a toilet seat insert can be helpful for young children learning to use the toilet. They can also be easily removed when an adult needs to use the toilet.
A nappy changing procedure could include:
A new service can apply for a review of their initial EQI rating once only in their first year of operation either in March or July.
A non-prescription preparation (such as arnica cream, antiseptic liquid, insect bite treatment spray and so on) that is:
A number of New Zealand education agencies provide information and resources about studying and teaching in New Zealand.
A paragraph indicating that the auditor is responsible for expressing an independent opinion on the financial statements. The auditor should also disclose whether he or she has any personal or professional interests/relationships with the centre other than as auditor.
A particular and established way of doing something.
A passphrase is a combination of 4 or more random words and characters. They can be used as a strong password. For example:
A password policy is a guideline that can help you create, look after, and use your password. If your school does not have a general guideline for passwords, learn how to create one using our guide below.
A password should be a minimum of 10 characters. To make your password complex:
A pattern or trend in the occurrence of minor injuries may lead to awareness of the need to make changes at the service.
A perceived conflict means a neutral person outside of the situation could think there is a conflict even if there is not one.
A person responsible can count towards the 50% qualification requirement provided they hold a recognised early childhood education teaching qualification.
A person who provides home-based education and care, as defined in the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008.
A person with a linked unique electronic signature.
A philosophy statement expresses the fundamental beliefs, vision, values and ideals a service operates under. It is a core document providing the basis for decisions on both how the service is managed and how the service operates on a day-to-day basis.
A philosophy statement guides the service's operation.
A phone at the centre allows:
A phone at the home allows:
A potential conflict means you can identify a conflict that could happen in the future.
A practising certificate can be marked:
A prescription (such as antibiotics, eye/ear drops and so on) or non-prescription (such as paracetamol liquid, cough syrup and so on) medicine that is:
A prescription (such as asthma inhalers, epilepsy medication and so on) or non-prescription (such as antihistamine syrup, lanolin cream and so on) medicine that is:
A primary characteristic of playcentres is that families manage and implement the education programme.
A primary teaching qualification recognised by the Teaching Council for the purposes of registration.
A prioritised settlement payment offer includes:
A procedure for monitoring children's sleep is displayed and implemented and a record of children's sleep times is kept.
A procedure for monitoring children's sleep is implemented, and information is communicated to parents about their child's daily sleep patterns.
A procedure for monitoring children's sleep.
A procedure for monitoring children's sleep. The procedure ensures that children:
A procedure for the changing (and disposal, if appropriate) of nappies is consistently implemented.
A procedure for the changing (and disposal, if appropriate) of nappies that aims to ensure:
A procedure for the changing (and disposal, if appropriate) of nappies.
A procedure for the hygienic laundering (off-site or on-site) of linen used by the children or adults.
A procedure outlining how the service will ensure hygiene and infection control outcomes are met when washing sick and soiled children.
A procedure outlining the service's response to injury, illness and incidents, including the review and implementation of practices as required.
A procedure people should follow if they wish to complain about non-compliance with the Regulations or criteria. The procedure includes the option to contact the local Ministry of Education office and provides contact details.
A procedure people should follow if they wish to complain about non-compliance with the Regulations or criteria. The procedure includes the option to contact the regional Ministry of Education office and provides contact details.
A procedure that sets out how the service will identify and respond to suspected child abuse and/or neglect.
A process for providing formal and informal opportunities for parents to:
A process for providing positive guidance to encourage social competence in children (C10)
A process for providing positive guidance to encourage social competence in children (C10);
A process for reviewing and evaluating the service's operation (for example, learning and teaching practices, philosophy, policies and procedures) by the people involved in the service.
A process for reviewing and evaluating the service's operation (for example, learning and teaching practices, philosophy, policies and procedures) by the people involved in the service. The process is consistent with criterion GMA4/GMA3 and includes a schedule showing timelines for planned review of different areas of operation.
A process for the prevention of child abuse is implemented, and a procedure for responding to suspected child abuse is followed when required.
A quiet area of the activity space needs to be set aside for use whenever children under the age of 2 need to sleep during a session. The sleeping space should preferably be somewhere that is not a 'high traffic' area of the centre. You can arrange furniture such as couches or shelving to control movement into the area by children, and to provide some barrier against sound.
A range of learning opportunities and experiences for children are planned for and provided that:
A recommendation report is not required unless requested by the property advisor.
A record is maintained for children participating in the service. Records are kept for at least 7 years.
A record of all food served during the service's hours of operation (other than that provided by parents for their own children). Records show the type of food provided and are available for inspection for 3 months after the food is served.
A record of all injuries, illnesses and incidents that occur at the service. Records include:
A record of all medicine (prescription and non-prescription) given to children attending the service. Records include:
A record of all safety checks and the results.
A record of enrolments of educators in a home-based service qualification must be kept by the service provider. This must clearly show the date of enrolment.
A record of excursions that includes:
A record of excursions. Records include:
A record of information and guidance sought from agencies and/or services (C13).
A record of serious illnesses and incidents that occur at the service (see HS25 for the requirement to record injuries). Records include:
A record of the emergency drills carried out and evidence of how evaluation of the drills has informed the annual review of the service's emergency plan.
A record of the emergency drills carried out.
A record of the opportunities provided for participation by parents and caregivers in decision making, including any meetings held and the decisions made.
A record of the time each child attending the service sleeps, and checks made by adults during that time.
A record of the written authority from parents for the administration of medicine in accordance with the requirement for the category of medicine outlined in Appendix 2.
A record of the written authority from parents for the administration of medicine in accordance with the requirement for the category of medicine outlined in Appendix 3.
A record of training and/or information provided to adults who administer medicine to children (other than their own) while at the service.
A regular appraisal system or professional growth cycle is documented and is part of an annual cycle linked to professional development and includes provision for ongoing coaching or mentoring and self-reflection.
A regulation under the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008.
A regulation under the Education (Playgroups) Regulations 2008.
A reminder also that the consultation for Years 7 to 13 English stays open until 13 June:
A reporting template is available in Appendix 2.
A request for a payment that parents may choose whether or not to make. There must be no penalty for parents who choose not to make the payment. Once an agreement to pay has been reached then services may enforce payment.
A safe and comfortable place to sleep (such as a bed, stretcher, mattress or couch) is available for children aged 2 and older that require sleep or rest during a session.
A safety check is made up of 7 components:
A safety need may be where a significant risk of harm or danger to the student, or to others, exists during the journey to and from school. This may be due to challenges such as:
A sample Staff Record is provided in Appendix 2.
A sample list of potential hazards is available as a starting point. Any hazards found should be documented and eliminated, isolated or minimised. Hazards in the playground are of particular concern in playgroups.
A sample procedure template is given the home-based nappy changing/disposal procedure.
A school board member has this role.
A school bus route may be moved or shortened if the location of students who are eligible to use the bus changes. It may also be stopped if not enough students are using the bus.
A school can use a Statement of Cash Flow to predict future cash flow which helps with matters of budgeting.
A school is open for instruction when compulsory organised teaching and learning is taking place for all student year levels. This can include online learning and school trips outside the classroom.
A school term's notice is normally given to your school before these changes are made.
A second recommendation report is made when stage 2 is complete to identify the preferred supplier. This report goes to the procurement owner and procurement leader for endorsement, before the procurement sponsor approves it.
A secondary school can set up its own student exchange programme with an overseas school. We must approve the programme.
A senior advisor from the Sensitive Claims team will be available to help you through the process.
A sensitive claim is where a person believes they were abused in a New Zealand state school and would like some form of redress from the Ministry of Education. In the past, these were called historic abuse claims.
A separate sleep room is not required to meet this criterion, although some services may consider this is preferable for their infants and toddlers.
A service cannot count employer KiwiSaver contributions towards the minimum salary requirement if the service attests to paying all employed certificated teachers according to Parity, Extended Parity and Full Parity Salary scales.
A service curriculum that is inclusive ensures all children know that the early childhood service they attend is a place where they belong and where they feel valued for who they are.
A service curriculum that supports social competence and understanding of appropriate behaviour will provide ongoing opportunities within flexible settings for children to practise through actions, words and behaviours their growing development.
A service intending to close must notify the Ministry regional office of the date the service will close.
A service provider that controls one or more kindergartens formerly recognised under the Kindergarten Regulations 1959, or that has formed from a free kindergarten association or associations that controlled kindergartens recognised under these Regulations.
A service providing education and care to 3 or more children under the age of 6 who are also receiving health services within premises under the control of the Ministry of Health or a district health board.
A service qualifies where staff (both paid and unpaid):
A service that is a community-based service prohibited from making financial gains that are distributed to their members including:
A service that is not community-based. It may be owned by a private company, publicly listed company, private trust, partnership, or an individual.
A service that operates without a regular roll, for example, services at ski fields.
A service where at least 1 child attends for more than 4 hours on any day.
A service where no child attends for more than 4 hours in total on any 1 day.
A service will develop a process to assist them to meet this criterion taking into consideration the beliefs, values, knowledge, and aspirations of children, their families, staff, and community. To aid transitions, a hospital-based process is likely to include interaction with the early childhood service that the child attends when they are not in hospital.
A session of 2.5 hours will receive funding for 3 hours.
A session of 2.5 hours will receive funding for 3 hours. 2.5 hours will be claimed as 20 Hours ECE hours and 0.5 hours must be claimed as Plus 10 ECE hours.
A short chain on the furniture connected to a metal eye on the wall, by means of a carabiner, D-bolt or similar, can be a good system. This means you can change your furniture around, and still have secure fastening for the heavy objects.
A short chain on the furniture connected to a metal eye on the wall, by means of a carabiner, D-bolt, or similar, can be a good system. This means furniture can be changed around, while still having secure fastening for heavy objects.
A shower, shub or bath is likely to be the most suitable facility depending on the age and size of the child. The need to occasionally wash or bathe older children is usually best met with a shower rather than a tub, using a hand-held shower head with warm water. It is normally only needed for toileting accidents or if a child has been sick.
A single Pacific language is the principal language of communication and instruction with children used 81% or more of the time, including in the implementation of the curriculum.
A single Pacific language is used at least 51% of the time as the language of communication and instruction with children, including in the implementation of the curriculum.
A single-stage open tender (also known as RFT) provides all the information for suppliers to submit a detailed response. This tender approach evaluates capability and capacity before pricing is assessed. It allows each response to be evaluated thoroughly and fairly.
A special excursion requires a specific risk assessment and development of a management plan prior to the excursion because the environment and circumstances in which these occur will be different each time.
A special purpose financial statement should include:
A specified agency is any government agency or statutory body that a service provider is required to notify if there is a serious (or as defined) injury, illness, incident or allegation.
A specified agency is any government agency or statutory body. This includes:
A specified offence means an offence identified in Schedule 2 of the Children's Act 2014.
A spreadsheet can be used. The IT lead can keep a track of when an access review was last completed for each system.
A staff member who declares a conflict must distance themselves from the buying process. They should not be involved in evaluating supplier offers or purchasing the goods or services.
A staffing and appointments policy and the process adhered to should document the process for developing and changing a job description.
A statement indicating to the reader that it is the service's management group and not the auditor who is responsible for the preparation of the financial report.
A statement intended to influence and determine decisions, actions and other matters.
A statement intended to influence and determine decisions, actions, and other matters.
A statistical index that measures the extent to which an early childhood service draws children from low socio-economic communities. The EQI is used to determine eligibility for Equity Funding.
A strong password is difficult for people and computers to guess, and easy for you to remember.
A student exchange is a reciprocal programme that gives students a chance to attend school in another country.
A student is eligible for a school bus conveyance allowance if they meet all 3 transport assistance criteria and:
A student must meet 3 criteria to be eligible for transport assistance.
A sufficient quantity and variety of (indoor and outdoor) furniture, equipment and materials is provided that is appropriate for the learning and abilities of the children attending.
A sufficient quantity and variety of (indoor and outdoor) furniture, equipment, and materials is provided that is appropriate for the learning and abilities of the children attending.
A sufficient quantity and variety of furniture, equipment, and materials is provided that is appropriate for the learning and abilities of the children participating in the service.
A supplier recommendation report is endorsed by the procurement leader and approved by the procurement sponsor. Then the contract is signed.
A table provided by the Ministry which shows the funding rates for all early childhood services.
A teacher at a teacher-led centre-based service who does not hold a practising certificate issued by the Teaching Council of Aotearoa, New Zealand (Teaching Council) or does not hold a Teaching Council-approved ECE qualification or New Zealand qualified primary teacher qualification.
A teacher becomes eligible to move up a pay step when they have completed 2,080 hours of work.
A teacher who takes a position in a lower salary scale shall receive credit in that scale for service in any higher scale.
A teacher-led centre-based service controlled by a kindergarten association.
A telephone is available for calls to and from the premises.
A telephone or other means of communication is available in the ECE activity room to enable adults providing education and care to call for assistance when necessary.
A template for sign-in and sign-out records is included in Appendix 2 in the ECE funding handbook.
A template for sign-in/sign-out records is included in Appendix 2.
A type of financial report. A special purpose financial report includes:
A unit of the Ministry of Education. One of the functions of Education Workforce is to assist with inquiries from members of the public who are interested in gaining teaching qualifications.
A variety of equipment and materials is provided that is appropriate for the learning and abilities of the children attending.
A variety of furniture, equipment, and materials is provided that is appropriate for the learning and abilities of the children attending.
A very large outside area may make supervision more difficult and the fencing of an enclosed smaller area adjacent to the home may be a sensible option.
A very minor injury can sometimes become more serious after a period of time, for example a minor graze becomes infected, and a child requires hospitalisation.
A way of meeting the criterion could be to provide copies of the statement of philosophy and important service policies are made available to parents after a child has enrolled or all relevant documents could be kept in one place in the centre, so that these can be easily accessed by parents.
A wide range of learning experiences are offered, from which children can choose familiar activities or try new challenges.
A written authority from a parent given at enrolment as part of an individual health plan, or whenever there is a change, detailing:
A written authority from a parent given at enrolment to the use of specific preparations on their child for the period that they are enrolled. The service must provide (at enrolment, or whenever there is a change) specific information to parents about the category (i) preparations that will be used.
A written authority from a parent given at the beginning of each day the medicine is administered, detailing:
A written child protection policy that contains:
A written emergency plan that includes at least
A written emergency plan that includes at least:
A written statement expressing the service's beliefs, values and attitudes about the provision of early childhood education and care.
A written supervision plan that ensures the health, safety and wellbeing of children enrolled in the service is maintained at all times.
AI can create content that seems plausible but contains nonsensical or incorrect detail. Whenever you use AI, make sure that you are reviewing and checking the outputs.
AI in education should improve teaching and learning, supporting knowledgeable and skilled teachers.
AI models are trained on huge amounts of data from different countries and cultures. This means most AI models are built on dominant cultures and languages. The tools may not accurately reflect indigenous knowledge. From a New Zealand context, they are likely to be weak on
About National Student Numbers
About attendance records and reporting
About information gathering for regulatory compliance purposes.
About long-term insights briefings
About national student numbers
About national student numbers has more information about what NSNs are.
About official information
About our education system
About our weathertightness standards
About the Education and Training Amendment Bill (No 2)
About the Holidays Act programme (Ministry payroll)
About the School Transport Hub
About the advice we release
About the pay parity opt-in scheme
About the translated content on our website.
About the work we do, who we are, and the policies and legislation that guide the education sector.
Absence rule exemptions - 7-7
Absence rule exemptions: 7-7
Absence rules exemptions apply only to the specific enrolment agreement for each child with learning support needs or health problems.
Absences can be claimed only for children who were enrolled to attend on that specific holiday.
Absences cannot be claimed for casual or conditional children who do not attend.
Acceptable optional charges
Acceptable qualifications for a person responsible are set out in a notice in the NZ Gazette. These include:
Accepted qualifications for home-based early learning education
Access education statistics and research.
Access is at Eden 5, 12 Normanby Road, Mt Eden Auckland.
Access reviews should determine whether access is right for the user, or if they need permissions removed or added.
Accessible car park available
Accessible formats available
Accessible versions in Braille, PDF and Word are on this site. Future key document will be done in NZ Sign Language. For other accessible versions, email
Accessing the Ministry website for the latest Annual Reporting circular
Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC)
According to Microsoft and Google, using 2FA can prevent up to 99% of untargeted attacks from happening. It is a crucial measure to protect data and information at your school.
Account security advice for IT providers or IT leads
Accountability to the Government means that
Accountability to the Ministry of Education is achieved primarily through the
Achievement and curriculum
Achievement challenges are the goals a
Acoustic materials (noise)
Act 1989 includes provisions about information sharing for the wellbeing and safety of children.
Act 2017, the Family Violence Act 2018, the Official Information Act 1982, or an Approved Information Sharing Agreement) or
Action Plan for Pacific Education
Action Plan for Pacific Education 2020-2023
Action Plan for Pacific Education for 2023
Action Plan for Pacific Education in 2018 and 2019
Action Plan website helps you in identifying, supporting and protecting vulnerable children.
Active supervision of children can be achieved in a number of ways including:
Active supervision takes advantage of all available learning opportunities and means never leaving children unattended. It means being able to monitor (see or hear) all children at all times, including indoors, outdoors and when sleeping. Educators should use their professional judgment and common sense when deciding when it is appropriate to have any children out of their direct line of sight. For example, for older children who want to use the toilet with some privacy, it is appropriate to supervise by remaining in hearing distance.
Activities and equipment should reflect the cultures of
Activities can include the prosecution of parents for absences if appropriate support is offered and not taken up.
Actual contact hours for teachers/staff (start and end dates and actual contact start and finish times spent teaching children).
Actual daily absence dates and times.
Actual daily attendance dates and times.
Actual funding entitlement
Add an organisational unit - Google for Education Help
Add together the FCHs for Under 2s for the month.
Add together the allowable discretionary hours that have been used to cover the absences of all certificated teachers for the day.
Add together the claimable hours for each day.
Add together the daily totals each month.
Add up the total actual hours worked each day by certificated teachers who were counted towards regulated (ratio) staff requirements. Write this number down.
Add up the total hours worked each day by Other Teachers who were counted towards regulated (ratio) staff requirements. Write this number down.
Additional advice and guidance on the rules can be found below.
Additional eligibility criteria for the school bus conveyance allowance
Additional guidance is available specifically for ECE services above ground level. We recommend reading High rise evacuation plans for ECE service providers (see HS4 Emergency plan and supplies, above).
Additional guidance is available specifically for centres above ground level (see HS5 Safe assembly areas, above).
Additional guidance is available specifically for centres above ground level, we recommend reading High rise evacuation plans for ECE service providers.
Additional guidance is available specifically for centres above ground level. Download High rise evacuation plans for ECE service providers (see HS3 Safe assembly areas, above).
Additional guidance is available specifically for centres above ground level. Download High rise evacuation plans for ECE service providers (see HS4 Emergency plan and supplies, above).
Additional guidance is available specifically for services above ground level, we recommend you read High rise evacuation plans for ECE service providers (see HS5 Safe assembly areas, above).
Additional guidance is available specifically for services above ground level, we recommend you read High rise evacuation plans for ECE service providers.
Additional guidance staffing
Additional handwashing facilities can also be provided in the kitchen setting, particularly if you are serving food.
Additional requirements for casual children's records
Additional requirements for conditional children's records
Additional requirements for education and care services and hospital-based services
Additional requirements for kindergartens
Additional tools to do safety checks at your early learning service.
Address for couriers and reception
Adequate access in each situation would be determined by ensuring that the shared facilities perform their function to a similar level as if they were located on the premises and meet the following outcomes.
Adequate access in this context means that the facility:
Adequate supervision is important. Depending on the layout of the centre, a high viewing window into the bathroom area may ensure privacy for children but allows for discreet supervision.
Adequate supervision is important. The educator will need to manage this depending on where the bathroom facilities are in relation to where children are located in the home.
Administration and management
Administrative staff may need access to the finance system, but not the Student Management System (SMS).
Administrator accounts are more at risk if they are compromised and can cause more damage to your systems if a cyber criminal gains access. IT leads should have separate accounts for everyday use and administrator tasks.
Administrator accounts are more at risk if they are compromised. IT leads should have separate accounts for everyday use and administrator tasks.
Administrator tasks include:
Administrators of a system, such as Google Workspace, should not be able to reset their own password. It is good practice to have 2 administrators, so they can reset each other's passwords. Google and Microsoft explain how to do this.
Adult-to-child ratios in early learning services
Adults are warm and friendly in their interactions with other adults.
Adults at the Playgroup require guidelines on:
Adults at the centre need to feel confident and capable of providing the necessary support to children when medication is administered. Because educators/staff do not generally have medical training, some form of training or information is required so they can do this. First aid courses do not commonly cover the correct administration of medicine, so this will not usually be sufficient.
Adults providing education and care
Adults providing education and care are familiar with relevant emergency drills and carry out each type of drill with children (as appropriate) on an, at least, 3-monthly basis.
Adults providing education and care are familiar with relevant emergency drills and carry these out with children on an at least 3-monthly basis emergency drills are practised.
Adults providing education and care are familiar with relevant emergency drills.
Adults providing education and care have access to information held by the hospital for each child participating in the service that includes:
Adults providing education and care must ensure any medicine given to a child is administered by authorised hospital personnel.
Adults providing education and care must not use, or be under the influence of, alcohol or any other substance that has a detrimental effect on their functioning or behaviour while responsible for children participating in the service.
Adults running your playgroup should be able to confidently and knowledgeably:
Adults should be able to scan the environment while working alongside children.
Adults should have adequate space to meet their own needs as they are working to support the education and care of the children.
Adults should have adequate space to meet their own needs as they are working to support the education and care of the children. What this space looks like, and how it is configured, will differ from centre to centre, and is dependent upon a number of factors. These include:
Adults visiting an early service to work
Adults who administer medicine to children (other than their own) are provided with information and/or training relevant to the task.
Advance days determine the number of days per month for which your service will receive advance funding.
Advance funding can only be paid up to the end of the current advance funding period. Refer to Section 2-4 for details on the funding cycle. Your Ministry regional office can also assist with further details.
Advance funding exceptions
Advice and resources to help if your child is being bullied, worried about bullying at school, or in some way involved in bullying.
Advice notices are available to services on the payment date. Services who have access to the Secure Data Portal can download and print their notices via the Secure Data Portal from the day of payment. Notices are available on the Secure Data Portal for a limited time only.
Advice provided by the Ministry of Education to the Minister on reform to Initial Teacher Education.
Advice seen by our ministers
Advisers on Deaf children
After 7 years, records can be disposed of. This needs to be done so that unauthorised access to the information is not possible.
After a recommendation report is approved by the procurement sponsor, schools must contact all suppliers who made offers and inform them of the outcome.
After evaluating scores individually, the evaluators meet to moderate scores and determine a preferred supplier. This process is led by the evaluation chair with support of the procurement officer.
After our visit, we will write to you to outline next steps. We will explain any requirements your service needs to meet.
After the incident has been managed on site (for example, first aid provided, parents notified, any other agencies notified if required), it is recommended that you then call your regional Ministry office to inform them of the incident. Then you should send them a copy of the notification.
After working with us, if you are still not happy with how we have handled your complaint, there are a range of options for you to consider seeking a resolution.
Age restrictions on use of AI
Agencies providing relief teachers are likely to be completing some components of the safety check. Centres/services can agree with the agency that it will complete those components on their behalf.
Agency roles and responsibilities
Agreement to optional charges
Alignment with Pacific Languages Strategy 2022 -2032
All ATIS payments are GST inclusive.
All DHBs have emergency plans. When an evacuation does occur, the service will need to follow the guidance of the wardens of the DHB the DHB evacuation plan. The plan will include the assembly area(s) for the hospital buildings.
All ECE services (or the administrators of a service provider) must
All ECE services except privately owned services
All Equity Funding payments are GST inclusive.
All I ask is that you raise your hand
All Police vetting information must be kept confidential and managed by your early learning service in accordance with the:
All Police vetting information must be kept confidential and managed by your school in accordance with the:
All RS7 returns must be accompanied by a completed declaration. The wording of this declaration is shown below.
All Targeted Funding payments are GST inclusive.
All Targeted Hours in eligible early learning services generate a fixed amount of funding.
All administrator accounts must have 2FA enabled.
All applications are considered individually by a panel of our staff.
All areas of the premises accessible to children, both indoors and outdoors, must be 100% smoke/vape-free.
All certificated teachers employed part time in a management position and part time in a teaching role, must be paid at least the applicable management salary amount on the relevant Minimum Salary Scale for Management Positions, for all hours they work in their management position, and at least the applicable salary amount on the relevant Minimum Salary Scale for Certificated Teachers when they are employed in a teaching role.
All changes to enrolment records must be dated and signed by a parent/guardian of the child.
All children will enter an early childhood service with a first language. Sometimes this language is different to the language or languages used in the centre. It is important that educators work in collaboration with the parents/
All children will enter an early childhood service with a first language. Sometimes this language is different to the language, or languages used in the service. It is important that
All children's workers employed or engaged by a service must be safety checked.
All complaints about the Ministry
All criteria must be met:
All domestic students between the ages of 5 until the end of the year in which they turn 19 are entitled to free enrolment and education at any state school or charter school. If the student receives Ongoing Resource Scheme (ORS) funding, this entitlement extends until they are 21.
All early childhood education services (or the administrators of service provider) must complete an RS7 Return in order to receive a funding payment.
All early learning services are experienced in settling new starters and understand that all children are different. Your service will work out a plan with you for how your child will be introduced to the new environment.
All early learning services have their own emergency guide. You can ask staff to see it.
All early learning services must have a complaints policy in place that is accessible to everyone.
All early learning services must meet the requirements of:
All early learning services will be assessed for their eligibility each year. There is no application process required.
All equipment and resources available to children must be safe and able to be kept hygienic. See HS1 Premises and contents are safe and hygienic for how to keep equipment hygienic.
All equipment for infants and toddlers should be washable.
All equipment purchased with ministry funding must be returned to us. It is therefore very important that clear financial records and equipment inventories are kept.
All funding correspondence will be sent to the funding contact person for the service provider.
All home-based ECE services must keep records for audit purposes and in a place where they can be easily accessed by the coordinator.
All home-based early learning services must meet the requirements set out in the regulations.
All homes will be designed differently but most will have lounge or living space that can be used for a variety of activities, including where children are able to find a place for quiet activities as necessary. An area without carpet can be used for more messy activities, such as painting or clay modelling, or a coversheet can be laid down to protect flooring as necessary so that children have the ability to experience different creative activities.
All indoor and outdoor items and surfaces, furniture, equipment and materials are safe and suitable for their intended use.
All interactions should create a sense of
All interactions should create a sense of whanaungatanga in the service.
All licensed ECE services are eligible for the ATIS if they meet the following criteria:
All licensed ECE services are eligible to receive this funding (provided additional criteria are met).
All licensed early childhood services connected to the ELI system need to complete and submit the ECE Census. Funding may be withheld in part or in full if a service does not submit a complete and accurate ECE Census by the due date.
All licensed early learning centres have to provide a safe dedicated sleeping area for children under the age of 2. For older children, a temporary sleeping area could be created each day as needed.
All licensed early learning services must have human resource management practices in place.
All licensed home-based services must have 1 person responsible for every 50 children in attendance and only act as a person responsible for 1 licensed early childhood service at the same time.
All licensed services and certificated playgroups are regulated by us.
All licensed services with an Isolation Index of 1.65 or greater, and that generate less than $20,000 per annum in ECE Funding Subsidy, 20 Hours ECE
All licensed teacher-led centre-based services are required to have 1 person responsible for every 50 children in attendance.
All numbers are in one column (pause).
All numbers are in whole dollars and the debits and credits are equal to zero (pause).
All other term dates are set by the Minister of Education.
All parents and caregivers at the playgroup share responsibility for the safety and supervision of all children attending.
All people involved in the procurement must sign a conflict of interest declaration.
All physical restraints training resources, including those below, are available on the page below.
All playgroups require a first aid kit.
All practicable steps are taken to ensure that children do not come into contact with any person (adult or child) on the premises who is suffering from a disease or condition likely to be passed on to children and likely to have a detrimental effect on them.
All practicable steps are taken to ensure that children do not come into contact with any person on the premises who is under the influence of alcohol or any other substance that has a detrimental effect on their functioning or behaviour.
All practicable steps are taken to ensure that noise levels do not unduly interfere with normal speech and/or communication or cause any child attending distress or harm.
All practicable steps are taken to ensure that noise levels in any ECE activity room do not unduly interfere with normal speech and/or communication, or cause any child attending distress or harm.
All practicable steps are taken to get immediate medical assistance for a child who is seriously injured or becomes seriously ill, and to notify a parent of what has happened.
All practicable steps are taken to get immediate medical assistance for a child who is seriously injured or becomes seriously ill, and to notify a parent or caregiver of what has happened.
All practicable steps are taken to protect children from exposure to inappropriate material (for example, of an explicitly sexual or violent nature).
All private vehicles must have the appropriate safety restraints for adults and children in accordance with the NZ Transport Agency regulations.
All private vehicles must have the appropriate safety restraints for adults and children in accordance with the NZ Transport Agency regulations. For more details, see the factsheet on the NZ Transport Agency website
All private vehicles must have the appropriate safety restraints for adults and children in accordance with the NZ Transport Agency regulations. See the factsheet on the NZ Transport Agency website for more details.
All products and natural materials used with children should be non-toxic. Beware of poisonous plants and seeds. Small seeds, for example wheat, can also be dangerous if children put them up their noses.
All qualifications should be considered, even if not directly related to teaching or education. Overseas qualifications must be assessed by NZQA as comparable to a New Zealand equivalent qualification.
All records required to support funding claims must be retained for a minimum of 7 years.
All remaining funds received from the Ministry of Education must be returned.
All right, let's kick off. So the, uh, welcome
All school transport drivers must be safety checked in accordance with the Children's Act 2014.
All school transport drivers must:
All schools must have a policy and practices that follow our rules and guidelines to minimise student distress and use of physical restraint.
All schools will have quality learning environments as part of a well-managed and sustainable portfolio.
All service providers take responsibility for ensuring all licensing requirements are met, including the 1:50 person responsible requirement.
All services must have their general purpose financial statements or special purpose financial report audited by a qualified auditor who is a member of the Chartered Accountants of Australia and New Zealand (CA ANZ), or CPA Australia Limited.
All services must keep educator timesheets (attendance records) that are signed and dated by the educator.
All services must keep the records listed in the table on the next page of this chapter.
All services need to ensure confidential information and records can be kept secure. In services without a lockable staff room or office, this can be achieved through the provision of lockable cupboards and/or lockable filing cabinets.
All services offering 20 Hours ECE and all children receiving 20 Hours ECE must meet the eligibility conditions at all times.
All services receiving quality funding rates must have parents/
All services that have been in operation for a full financial year must provide the Ministry with copies of their audited financial reports. Community-based and private services have different reporting requirements. The types of financial reports required is outlined in 12-2: Types of Financial Reports.
All services will have at least 1 staff member with a valid first aid certificate for every 25 children present. Educators at home-based services must have a valid first aid qualification from an accredited first aid training provider.
All staff and contractors who have unsupervised access to children at a school must be Police vetted
All staff employed or engaged in the service are provided with ongoing support and receive a documented orientation and induction into the service which outlines all policies and procedures.
All state and state-integrated schools and
All students must have the appropriate documents to travel to and from New Zealand. This includes valid passports and visas.
All surfaces on and around the change area must be smooth, impervious and able to be easily wiped cleaned and disinfected (a towel does not meet this criterion). Any change mat or pad must have a non-porous covering or be disposed of after each child is changed.
All surfaces on and around the change area should be smooth, impervious to moisture and able to be easily wiped clean and disinfected. Any change mat or pad must have a non-porous covering or be disposed of after each child is changed. See HS3 Nappy changing procedure.
All teacher-led services must comply with regulated qualification requirements and have a person responsible at all times of operation.
All the calendar days in a month, from the first day of the month to the last day e.g. 1 July to 31 July.
All the information requested is withheld under these sections of the Act.
All training modules, including the compulsory module, are listed here.
All-day and sessional education and care services each have four sets of funding rates.
All-day and sessional kindergarten
All-day education and care services and hospital-based services - Base funding rates
All-day education and care services and hospital-based services - Extended parity funding rates
All-day education and care services and hospital-based services - Full parity funding rates
All-day education and care services and hospital-based services - Parity funding rates
All-day over 2 sleep provisions
All-day services with only children over the age of 2 attending have a level of choice about the space they provide for sleep. Centres may choose to manage this differently according to their operation or philosophy.
All-day teacher-led centre-based services.
Allow 5 to 10 minutes for the system to generate your certificate. You may need to log out and then log back in again for your certificate to be available.
Allow plenty of space for children to have independent access to their belongings to give them the ability to take some responsibility for their things, including choosing what to wear throughout the day. It is important to remove anything that may be harmful to children, for example, medicines.
Allow space within the sleep room for door opening and adult supervision (for example an armchair for an adult).
Allowance for travel costs
Allowances for teachers in Pacific bilingual or immersion education and care services: 5-3-2
Allowances for teachers in Pacific immersion and bilingual education and care services: 5-3-2
Allowing plenty of space between sleeping children will enable good air flow, limiting cross infection and children disturbing others. Sleep areas must be well ventilated to allow air to circulate.
Allowing these shared facilities will save unnecessary duplication of expensive facilities while still achieving health and safety outcomes for children.
Allowing young children the freedom to explore and play.
Alternative arrangements if parents are not at home when children are dropped home
Alternative arrangements if parents are not at home when children are to be dropped off.
Alternative disinfectants/products are to be used strictly in accordance with the manufacturer instructions.
Alternative systems may include:
Alternatively, write in the number of adults your service will need if you want fewer children per adult than is required by the regulation (note that you can have more adults working with children than required, but not the other way around).
Although it is important there is a place for people at the centre to go to when a fire breaks out or in another emergency such as an earthquake, it is just as important to ensure that this place does not put children or adults in further danger from other hazards. This can be a challenge for some centres because of the layout of their premises and proximity to main roads, car parks, waterways and so on. Young children often behave erratically when scared or distressed, and adults need to reduce stress (for themselves, as well as for the children) in these situations as much as possible.
Although it is important there is a place for people at the playgroup to go to when a fire breaks out, it is just as important to ensure that this place does not put children or adults in further danger from other hazards. This can be a challenge for some playgroups because of the layout of their premises and proximity to main roads, carparks, waterways and so on. Young children often behave erratically when scared or distressed, and adults need to reduce stress (for themselves, as well as for the children) in these situations as much as possible.
Although not part of the licensing criteria against which early childhood services are assessed, services are required to make reasonable efforts to accommodate children with medication needs arising from a disability or illness.
Although plastic products can be cheaper and easy to clean, they may not last as long or have the same aesthetic appeal as products made from natural materials. Buying quality materials at the start will save money in the long run.
Although some of them will stay as question mark.
Although the area needs to be 'designated' as a sleep space, it can be used by children for play when no children require sleep.
Always fasten to the structure of the building. Studs are fine, but wallboards may be too weak.
Always round up to the nearest number. Therefore, this centre needs a total of 2 toilets to meet this criterion.
Amendments to section 127 of the Education and Training Act 2020
Amendments to the Equal Pay Act 1972, which came into effect on 6 November 2020, introduce a new process for individual employees and unions to raise a pay equity claim directly with an employer for work, which may be subject to systemic sex-based discrimination.
Amount and details of Ministry funding
An EC13 or other supporting documentation may also be required for the exemption to be approved.
An ECE teaching qualification or a primary teaching qualification recognised by the Teaching Council for registration purposes, and
An ECE teaching qualification recognised by the Teaching Council for the purposes of registration.
An EPO must apply to us for approval before it can start offering a student exchange programme in New Zealand.
An actual conflict means a conflict already exists.
An agreed statement about the operation of the playgroup is available for people to read.
An agreed statement of group aims and information outlining:
An agreement to pay ongoing optional charges must include information about how long the agreement will last and/or what the rules are about making changes to the agreement.
An all-day centre is licensed for 25 children, including up to 5 children under the age of 2. A maximum of 3 staff are required to meet adult to child ratios (2 for the older children, and 1 for the under 2s).
An all-day service will need to consider how they can provide an appropriate space for adults, as there are requirements for breaks under employment law.
An alternative name for a funding claim audit.
An ample supply of water that is fit to drink is available to children at all times, and older children are able to access this water independently.
An annual budget guides financial expenditure.
An annual budget must be prepared.
An annual budget setting out the service's estimated revenue and expenses for the year. The budget includes at least:
An annual budget should be prepared once a year and then reviewed every 6 months, or more frequently throughout the financial year.
An annual plan can be divided up into each month in the annual cycle, with key tasks grouped by area. The Ministry would expect each task to identify who is responsible for the task, what the task is, and when in the annual cycle the task is scheduled to be undertaken.
An annual plan guides the service's operation.
An annual plan identifying 'who', 'what', and 'when' in relation to key tasks the service intends to undertake each year, and how key tasks will have regard to the Statement of National Education and Learning Priorities (NELP).
An annual plan is part of good business practice and will show the Ministry of Education how the service intends to ensure ongoing compliance with all regulatory requirements and criteria.
An attendance record must be kept for each child attending the early childhood education and care service.
An attendance record that meets requirements outlined in the ECE funding handbook for children participating in the service, and children who have attended in the previous 7 years.
An attendance record that meets the requirements outlined in the ECE funding handbook for children currently attending, and children who have attended in the previous 7 years.
An attestation included in the enrolment agreement must be signed for each child receiving 20 Hours ECE. 20 Hours ECE funding must not be claimed for a child until the service has received a completed and signed attestation.
An audit of a centre will generally take a full day, although sometimes longer periods may be required. The Resourcing Auditor will need a quiet place in which to work and access to a staff member who can answer any questions that arise.
An early childhood education and care centre.
An early childhood education service that offers a mixture of both teacher-led and parent-led education and care sessions.
An emergency closure occurs when circumstances beyond the control of home-based services or individual home-based educators cause temporary closures.
An emergency closure occurs when circumstances beyond the control of individual services cause temporary closures. Closures are normally for 1 or 2 days only.
An employed certificated teacher should progress one salary step:
An equipment inventory maintained to at least show equipment purchased with Ministry of Education funds.
An evacuation procedure for the premises.
An example RS3 form can be found in Appendix 2.
An example enrolment form can be downloaded from Chapter 6-1 in the ECE funding handbook. This form can be adapted to suit the services particular circumstances but must have at least the mandatory requirements.
An example of an emergency drill to practise is the earthquake drill.
An example of an inventory list can be found at the bottom of this section.
An example of the required attestation is shown below:
An example of this is where a school has a statutory intervention and the Ministry contributes to the cost. The adjustment is not pre-set in the Kiwi Park model. The level of support provided by the Ministry is confirmed by email and this should be manually adjusted in sales H10 and H75. In our example, the Ministry provided a subsidy of $8,000. This is entered into Cell H10, towards the expense of the intervention expense minus $8,000 is entered into cell H75.
An incident is an event that caused, or may have caused, harm to a child while in care of a service.
An inclusive curriculum is strengths based and founded on
An income threshold for financial reporting is being introduced from 1 January 2011.
An income top-up for small, licensed early childhood services, that are located in isolated areas.
An indicative hourly rate can be found by dividing the minimum salary level by 2080 (40 hours x 52 weeks), rounding is to be applied to at least 2 decimal places.
An injury and incident procedure flowchart is available for services to use.
An introductory paragraph identifying the accounting policies used.
An inventory of systems and applications that your school uses will help aid the implementation of least privileges.
An occupied child-place that is funded for 1 hour.
An official examination and verification of accounts and records.
An ongoing process means that scheduled self-reviews and internal evaluations are undertaken regularly and are linked to and reflect on previous reviews or evaluations. An ongoing process involves asking questions such as:
An ongoing process of self-review and internal evaluation
An ongoing process of self-review and internal evaluation helps the service maintain and improve the quality of its education and care.
An optional charge should only be requested for excursions if:
An overview of new requirements for schools from Term 2 2025.
An overview of pay equity and the framework, as well as a guide to good practice, are available on the Employment New Zealand website.
An overview of the network of
An overview of the record keeping requirements for all services:
An untreated sore throat could lead to Rheumatic fever.
An unwell adult may need to be excluded from your premises. This is permitted by Regulation 57 of the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008.
An up-to-date inventory can help you when you are buying new equipment.
And Don has given a hot topic on Facebook for principles,
And Donna's asked, uh, we mark ahead of time
And any 3-year-old, 4-year-old or 5-year-olds that will not receive 20 Hours ECE at your service (for example children who are already receiving their 20 hours of 20 Hours ECE at another service).
And as I said, the the way that these codes work is,
And for the SMS providers that enable this, if you want
And just further to that, the, um, the thresholds
And one thing I just wanted to state was the purpose
And one thing that I will share just to demonstrate that,
And one thing that we were not looking to do at this point,
And really the end of the day is, you know, as, as long
And should their leaving date be the same last day
And so all, um, as I said,
And so as a result from term one next year, that's day one,
And so from where we are coming from,
And so if we go back up to this slide here,
And so in terms of how the codes were redesigned,
And so the, as a, the more fulsome guidelines,
And so there, this has been a, as I said, a very
And so we had a lot of school principals tell us, mark, um,
And so what we have here is
And so what we have here is a, as you can see,
And so what you're going to find on there is a lot
And so with that said, um, we did hear a number
And that way it is not reported, um, to the ministry.
And that would be a good way to, to do that, to record that.
And the previous definition, which I believe was a, um,
And then the next one you, you change.
And then we've also got a hand raised from D
And there haven't been too many, um,
And we feel that on balance, what you're about to look at,
And we have tried to factor in, um,
And we've got a question from Tanya in the chat.
And what we have done here
And what we have done is we have just caught,
And yeah, so historically, um, for, for a brief presentation
And, um, so I, I use this example
And, you know, it's a parent condoned absence
Animals brought to the hospital would usually be part of a formalised visiting programme.
Annoyance (external source)
Annual Top-Up for Isolated Services (ATIS)
Annual financial statements
Annual financial statements must include:
Annual financial statements timeline
Annual financial statements.
Annual implementation plan template
Annual top up for isolated services
Annual top-up for Isolated Services (ATIS)
Annual top-up for isolated services (ATIS)
Annual top-up for isolated services: 5-1
Annual top-up isolated services (ATIS): Chapter 5
Any ECE activity room and equipment used by children as part of the ECE programme are checked on every day of operation for hazards. Hazards to the safety of children are eliminated, isolated or minimised.
Any accidents or injuries have to be recorded to identify hazards and make sure appropriate action is taken.
Any activity where children play with, near or in water poses a high safety risk. In such a situation, the educator should have constant visual contact and be in close proximity to the children at all times. If the educator needs to move away from the area they should take all children with them away from the water.
Any alcohol is to be stored in a locked cupboard.
Any change must be signed and dated by the parent/guardian. Funding for the attendance of a conditionally enrolled child must not be claimed until the parent/guardian has signed this record.
Any change to a school should involve discussion with the school's community before a formal consultation.
Any change to agreements on optional charges is a change to the enrolment agreement.
Any charge must be a reasonable one. You should be told of the charge, or given an estimate, before the information is provided.
Any child can enrol at an early learning service in New Zealand from birth until they turn 6. You can do this by contacting the service directly. They will talk you through what you need to do. If you haven't visited the service, you can arrange a visit, with or without your child, before you sign up.
Any confidential administrative records kept in the home setting must be stored using a lockable cupboard, file box, file cabinet, drawer or room to ensure visitors to the home cannot access these.
Any damage to premises, furnishing or fittings should be removed or items replaced as soon as possible.
Any examples in the guidance are provided as a starting point to show how services can meet (or exceed) the requirement. Services may choose to use other approaches better suited to their needs as long as they comply with the criteria.
Any extension must be for a reasonable period of time in the circumstances.
Any external systems that connect to your school systems should have restrictive permissions. Integrations should be monitored as part of periodic reviews. Access should be revoked when no longer needed.
Any fixed outdoor equipment should meet current New Zealand safety standards.
Any food is prepared, served, and stored hygienically.
Any furnishing or fittings not fit for purpose should be removed from play areas until remedial action can be taken. Items can then be repaired or replaced as soon as possible.
Any furnishing or fittings not fit for purpose should be removed from play areas until remedial action can be taken. Items can then be repaired or replaced as soon as possible. If your playgroup is in rented premises talk to your landlord about who is responsible for repairing or replacing furniture, furnishings and fittings.
Any government agency or statutory body that a home-based education and care service is required to notify if there is a serious (or as defined) injury, illness, incident or allegation. This may include but is not limited to:
Any government agency or statutory body that an early childhood education and care service is required to notify if there is a serious (or as defined) injury, illness, incident or allegation. This may include but is not limited to:
Any handwashing facilities in the ECE activity room need to meet the particular requirements of the children using them.
Any historic documentation stored at a head office needs to be easily retrievable when required.
Any historic documentation stored off-site needs to be easily retrievable when required.
Any information gathering we carry out is done in accordance with relevant internal processes and procedures, and in accordance with internal delegations and authorisations. Our processes and activities are reviewed when required to ensure compliance with the law, and with our internal policies and procedures.
Any issues with the layout of the premises that limit supervision should be included on the hazard register.
Any optional charge for an excursion must be for the education and care of the child and be able to be separated out and measured.
Any other people present.
Any other qualification should be completed within 2 years of enrolment.
Any over funding of Targeted Funding is repayable by the early learning service to the Ministry.
Any overpayments that occur due to over-claims on the EC20 form are recovered by the Ministry in the next available wash-up payment. If a service is not due to receive sufficient funding to cover the overpayment, the Ministry will invoice the service for the funding owed and payment is due immediately.
Any overpayments that occur due to over-claims on this RS3 form are repayable to the Ministry immediately.
Any personal information you supply will only be used by the Ministry and the third-party service providers who support the Learner Identity Broker service as permitted by the Privacy Act 2020.
Any policy could include actions the service will take and how they will communicate with
Any potentially harmful substances or materials must be made inaccessible. This will include cleaning products and medicines, but may also include face, body and/or hair products used by other members of the family.
Any previous relevant work experience that has occurred more than 10 years ago should not be credited.
Any previous relevant work experience that has occurred within the past 10 years should be credited as half-service up to a maximum of 2 years' service.
Any previous relevant work experience that has occurred within the past 10 years should be credited as half-service up to a maximum of two steps.
Any questions, more than happy to answer them.
Any request that lacks due particularity will not be valid. If this is the case, we may contact you to clarify your request.
Any service applying for a licence to operate a home-based ECE service must provide evidence of anticipated or expected enrolments with their application.
Any sleeping child must be monitored as required by HS9 Sleep monitoring.
Any split of funding payments should be negotiated between past and present ownership. Legal and financial advisers should assist negotiations.
Any substance used for a therapeutic purpose and includes prescription and non-prescription preparations having the meaning assigned to these under Appendix 2.
Any substance used for a therapeutic purpose and includes prescription and non-prescription preparations having the meaning assigned to these under Appendix 3.
Any windows or other areas of glass accessible to children are either:
Anyone aged 17 years or above who lives in a home where home-based education and care is being provided must be Police vetted:
Anyone can make a complaint if they are concerned or not satisfied with a situation, process or decision at an early learning service.
Anyone can report suspected abuse or neglect of a child or young person.
Anyone can report suspected abuse or neglect of a child.
Anyone involved in the procurement who has an actual, potential or perceived conflict of interest must sign a declaration.
Anyone should report concerns about possible abuse or neglect of a child or young person to
Anyone who is in New Zealand can request official information.
Anyone who works with children must be safety checked.
AoDC work together with a range of other agencies including:
AoDC work together with families and educators to find the best ways to support your child. They provide ongoing advice and guidance on communication, language development and learning through early childhood and into school.
Appendix 1: All-day and sessional kindergartens for the funding rate table
Appendix 1: First aid kit requirements for criterion PF15
Appendix 1: First aid kit requirements for criterion PF28
Appendix 1: First aid kit suggestions
Appendix 1: First aid requirements for criterion PF15
Appendix 1: First aid requirements for criterion PF28
Appendix 1: Funding rates
Appendix 1: Funding rates tables
Appendix 1: Supporting the children on session
Appendix 2 of the ECE funding handbook
Appendix 2: Categories of medicine HS25
Appendix 2: Categories of medicine for criterion HS25
Appendix 2: Characteristics of infants, toddlers and young children
Appendix 2: Infectious diseases for criterion HS26
Appendix 2: Resources and examples
Appendix 3: Categories of medicine for criterion HS28
Appendix 4 contains the salary scales for Education and Care and Hospital-based services, including minimum salary scales from 1 January 2023 as well as the updates that will be available from 1 November 2023.
Appendix 4 contains the salary scales for Education and Care and Hospital-based services, including minimum salary scales from 1 January 2023 as well as updates that are available from 1 November 2023 including:
Appendix 4: Salary scales for education and care services
Appendix 4: Tessa learns about physics
Application for a transitional advance.
Application for approval as an Exchange Programme Organisation NZ
Application for change of service quality rate for early childhood services.
Application for exemption from absence rule for special and/or health needs.
Application form for intermediate, secondary and area schools with Years 7 to 13.
Application form for primary schools with Years 1 to 8.
Application of the 1:50 person responsible ratio
Application to receive Equity Funding
Application to receive Equity Funding for providing early childhood education in a language and culture other than English.
Applications and online systems
Applications can also be started by parents. You will receive a notification to view and complete the application before it can be submitted to us.
Applications close in the third week of November.
Applications for Component A are not necessary. The Ministry of Education calculates the EQI for each licensed ECE service and notifies services that are eligible for funding.
Applications for Component B are not necessary. The Ministry of Education calculates the EQI for each service and notifies services that are eligible for funding.
Applications for Component C require attestation. Services that believe they are eligible for this component should complete the EC15 Language and Culture other than English (including sign language) Form.
Applications for Component D are not necessary. The Ministry of Education calculates the Isolation Index for each new service, using census information and the physical location of the service.
Applications for new or amended services should be submitted at least one full school term before the service is required. If the availability of transport is going to affect enrolment decisions for a family, discuss this with your learning support coordinator or manager at your regional office.
Applications for the ATIS are not necessary. The Ministry identifies eligible services using the Isolation Indices and funding data. Eligible services will be advised of their receipt of ATIS on the ECE Funding Notice that accompanies their July funding payment.
Applications must be submitted online. You must check that all the fields in the application are filled in before you send it to us. Any missing information will delay your application from being processed.
Applications open in the first week of November.
Applies only to services licensed for under 2-year-olds
Apply absence rules when submitting the service RS7 Return. Retain the EC30 HB with the approval letter for your records.
Apply at least a full school term before the service is needed. It can take time for our transport providers to organise a vehicle and driver. We may also need to make alterations to school property.
Apply for a boarding allowance
Apply for a licence for a centre-based service
Apply for a licence for home-based service
Apply for a licence or certification
Apply for an early learning service licence
Apply for an early learning service licence or certification
Apply for extraordinary roll growth funding
Apply for school transport assistance
Apply for your boarding allowance by 31 October.
Apply to the Teaching Council to become a certificated teacher.
Applying for a conveyance allowance
Applying for a review of your EQI
Applying for a scholarship
Applying is free and normally takes 4 to 6 weeks.
Applying the right levels of access
Applying to be an approved EPO
Appointment policies and procedures are clear, reflect the requirements of current legislation, provide managers with useful guidance and are regularly reviewed.
Approach to improving attendance in schools
Appropriate adult:child ratios
Appropriate adult:child ratios.
Appropriate rules and behavioural boundaries are consistently and positively applied.
Approved safety check service
Are adults able to have breaks (or non-contact time) out of sight of the children if they wish?
Are different types of laundry washed separately to prevent cross infection for example kitchen and bathroom linen separated from bedding linen for example?
Are different types of laundry washed separately to prevent cross infection, for example, kitchen and bathroom linen separated from bedding linen?
Are our relationships with
Are soiled nappies stored and disposed of or given to parents to take home for disposal?
Are the safety procedures in the building being maintained?
Are they struggling with anything?
Are we doing what we are required to?
Are we following our policies and procedures?
Area School Teachers' Collective Agreement
Area school principals covered by a collective agreement from 13 April 2011 are not eligible to get a bus controller allowance.
Areas of concrete or paving are also suitable for outdoor activity, provided they have been laid correctly. Both types generally drain well and have the advantage of needing little maintenance. However, they are hard and abrasive and cannot be used as a safety surface.
Areas of decking, concrete or paving are also suitable for outdoor activity, provided they do not pose any other hazards. Both types generally drain well and have the advantage of needing little maintenance. However, they are hard and abrasive and cannot be used as a safety surface.
Areas used for storage of sleep furniture should be dry and well aired.
Areas which are primarily for adults such as the office are sometimes used for additional storage. Care should be taken to ensure that by doing this, no-one is exposed to the possibility of injury from tripping or falling over poorly stacked or stored items or resources.
Aroha is conditionally enrolled to attend from 9:00am to 3:00pm Monday through Friday.
Arrived From Another Service flag (permanent staff only).
Artificial grass has the advantage of being low-maintenance and, if correctly laid, usable in all weather. For safety reasons, only use artificial grass that is laid over a base of sand, not plastic beads. Artificial grass can be abrasive to bare skin and can also harbour pathogens if not cleaned regularly.
Artificial intelligence has been around for a while, powering technology like predictive text. It is quickly becoming more widely available to more people, in free-to-use and paid tools and services.
As Crown entities, school boards are expected to follow government procurement rules. To simplify these rules, we have developed a procurement process for use on school-led property projects.
As I said, mark, we are not clear about the difference
As I said, we have left that untouched.
As a general rule, 2 things help to reduce noise.
As a general rule, 2 things help to reduce noise:
As a general rule, public transport generally offers less risk than using private vehicles. If private vehicles are used, consider the following:
As a minimum, records should include the:
As a progress tool, it is best to save iterations of the file as you go so you can go back a step or two in case you lose track of changes and updates.
As a progress tool, it is best to save iterations of the file as you go so you can go back a step or two, if you lose track of where you are in developing the Kiwi Park model for the school.
As a service provider, you can certify a photocopy of an original qualification.
As all bathrooms are set up differently, it is important to work alongside licensing staff to meet this requirement.
As children learn to make sense of their world and develop working theories, they develop an understanding of themselves and others in social contexts, including the early childhood service.
As children learn to make sense of their world and develop working theories, they develop an understanding of themselves in social contexts including the early childhood service.
As members of an early childhood education service, we belong to a community of weavers, working together to provide the best possible learning and teaching for children.
As much as possible, the design and layout of homes should not make it too difficult for the educator (as the only adult present) to actively supervise all children attending.
As parent helpers are a key part of adult:child ratio they are critical to the success of the supervision and health and safety on an excursion. Take some time to think through what they need to know about expectations of them, and how to communicate this to them. Consider the following:
As part of Budget 24 Minister Simmonds has announced changes relating to Fees Free, Apprenticeship Boost, Tertiary funding and Overseas student loan interest rates.
As part of the introduction of Te Kura Rau Iti's enrolment scheme, some adjustments to the enrolment scheme of Te Uho o Te Nikau are also proposed.
As safe practice, have 2 adults accompanying the children travelling in a private vehicle. The exception to this would be where a parent was transporting only their own children.
As safe practice, have two adults accompanying the children travelling in a private vehicle. The exception to this would be where a parent was transporting only their own children.
As well as being unclimbable, structures, fences and gates should not be hazardous to attending children and adults or to the public.
As well as being warm, children should be safe while they sleep. Advice on safe sleeping to reduce risk of Sudden Unexpected Death of an Infant (SUDI) is available here:
As with all child protection matters, we have a commitment to keep children safe, and this must always come first. You should carefully consider whether volunteers at school, or those participating in school activities, should be Police vetted. You should strongly consider Police vetting volunteers who have regular, overnight, or 1-on-1 contact with children.
As with the ECE Funding Subsidy, Equity Funding may not exceed six hours per child-place per day (or per child for 20 Hours ECE), to a maximum of 30 hours per child-place per week (or per child for 20 Hours ECE).
As you are well aware, the model has been evolving and improvements have been made over the past ten years with input from the sector including changes to reporting requirements in public sector accounting standards.
As young children make sense of their world through active exploration and interaction it is important to give children real and authentic experiences with quality objects and materials.
As your stock of outdoor equipment grows it could also be useful to purchase a lockable outdoor shed.
Ashburton Kindergarten Association
Assemble the evaluation team
Assess the likelihood and impact of identified risks.
Assessment and aromatawai
Assessment for all children should be consistent with the principles of
Assets acquired by lease or higher purchase do not generate cash transactions in the bank account other than paying the periodic instalments. We need to check that the pre-set adjustment is working correctly in column Q. In our example, the school signed new leases for equipment worth $20,368. The purchase on row Q171 is set off against lease liabilities on row Q234.
Assistance is also available from
Assurance over the procurement of bus services - Tender 2
Assurance over the procurement of school bus services
At a minimum, the teacher must hold a current New Zealand practising certificate and a recognised ECE or primary teaching qualification. It is up to the teacher to provide evidence of their qualifications and previous work experience.
At a sessional service, there may be occasions when an older child needs to rest or sleep. Services need adequate facilities to cater for these times. How a service provides these facilities depends on what suits their particular centre layout and operation.
At least 50% of required staff must have a recognised early learning teaching qualification.
At least 50% of the adults who work with children at teacher-led services must be qualified early learning teachers, but some may have more than this.
At other times infants need adults to talk with them, anticipate their interest, actions and requirements as well as provide new opportunities and experiences.
At schools using cohort entry, children can start on one of 8 set dates throughout the year.
At some points in the handbook there are best practice tips your service may want to try (or may already be using!).
At the afternoon session, 1 certificated teacher (Leilani) was working. Leilani was counted towards regulated (ratio) staff for a further 3 hours.
At the afternoon session, one certificated teacher (Leilani) was working. Leilani was counted towards regulated (ratio) staff for a further 3 hours.
At the end of each month check the attendance pattern of each child in your service.
At the end of the day, this really is all about you
At the end of the next month
At this stage, the Ministry is taking an educative approach to assessing the NELP.
Attach a pre-printed deposit slip from your bank showing the bank account number or
Attached teacher funding and staffing entitlements
Attendance Management Plans
Attendance action plan: Second phase of initiatives for school attendance
Attendance and achievement
Attendance code decision tree
Attendance codes comparison table
Attendance codes questions and answers
Attendance information collected
Attendance management plans for school boards
Attendance presentation with talking points
Attendance records also ensure that licence maximums are not exceeded.
Attendance records are used by the Ministry of Education to verify that the children have attended the service as claimed and to identify when a child is absent, and to verify that the absence rules have been applied correctly.
Attendance records may be kept in a form to suit the service. However, all services must include all of the following:
Attendance records must be marked daily for safety reasons and in order to keep accurate records for funding claims.
Attendance records serve a number of purposes for funding. They:
Attendance records which include the full name and age of each child that participated at any time during the day and the location of attendance (ward or playroom).
Attendance school newsletter template
Attending a school that is not your nearest one
Attending a state-integrated school
Attest (Certificated teacher salary)
Attestation (of certificated teacher salaries)
Attestation for Waha Rumaki
Attestation of certificated teachers' salaries
Attestation on the RS7 return
Attestation should be continued to acknowledge the skills of
Attestation was originally introduced as an interim measure for
Auckland Kindergarten Association
Audio summary - Action Plan for Pacific Education for 2023
Audit report prepared by a member of the New Zealand Institute of Chartered Accountants
Audited annual financial statements form part of your school or kura annual report. Learn about the timeline and process for producing them.
Audited general purpose financial statements or special purpose financial report.
Auditor must not also prepare statements
Audits and financial statements
Authorisation and acknowledgement
Avoid over stacking both on top of and inside cupboards.
Avoid using common phrases or sayings. Some examples of weak passphrases are:
Avoid using personal information
Babies are not allowed to have bottles in bed or cots at an early learning service.
Background information that explains the 'what', 'where', 'when' and 'why' of funding.
Balancing activities to ensure risk is minimised.
Barrier-Free Access: Great education opportunities and outcomes are within reach for every learner.
Barry Avenue (Behind Cromwell College)
Base Funding Rates are available to services who pay at least Base Salary Scale (Step 1).
Base Funding Rates are available to services who pay at least Step 1.
Base Salary Scale (Step 1)
Base Salary Scale (Step 1).
Base funding rates which reflect the proportion of certificated teacher hours used are available to services that agree to pay all employed certificated teachers at least the amount specified at Step 1 of the salary scale.
Base salary scale (Step 1)
Base salary scale example: November funding period
Based on this advice, the Government may adjust the value of some, or all, of the funding rates.
Basic elements of audit report
Basic food hygiene is important to avoid outbreaks of food-borne illness at Playgroups.
Basic food hygiene is important to avoid outbreaks of food-borne illness in ECE centres.
Basic food hygiene is important to avoid outbreaks of food-borne illness in home-based services.
Be a strong enough concentration that is, 0.1% (see table below). If there is visible contamination, then use a stronger 1:10 solution.
Be a strong enough concentration, that is, 0.1% (see table below). If there is visible contamination, then use a stronger 1:10 solution.
Be aware of foods which are more likely to cause choking.
Be aware of foods which are more likely to cause choking:
Be clear about what is acceptable in terms of taking photographs of children on the excursion.
Be sprayed and left on for enough time to kill the bugs before wiping away (ideally 30 minutes contact time)
Be sprayed and left on for enough time to kill the bugs before wiping away (ideally 30 minutes contact time).
Be used on a surface free of dirt/organic material
Be used on a surface free of dirt/organic material.
Because educators do not generally have medical training, some form of training or information is required so they can do this. First aid courses do not commonly cover the correct administration of medicine, so this will not usually be sufficient.
Because home bathrooms are not designed for the exclusive use of attending children, educators need to think about how children using these facilities can be kept safe. Cleaning procedures also need to be implemented to ensure body wash facilities are hygienic before and after use.
Beds are single level sleep furniture where the upper surface of the mattress is less than 700mm above the floor. Children are able to get in and out of a bed without adult assistance.
Beehive Press release (Braille)
Before a person is employed or engaged as a children's worker, as defined in the Children's Act 2014, a safety check as required by that Act must be completed.
Before completing the RS7 Return, ensure that you have read Chapter 4 20 Hours ECE.
Before establishing a programme, your school should consider:
Before issuing a NELP, the Minister must, at a minimum, consult with stakeholders in the early childhood and compulsory education sectors.
Before purchasing new equipment or safety surfacing, service providers should ensure the product has been tested against the specifications of NZS 5828:2015 and the manufacturer can supply a certificate of compliance for that product.
Before purchasing, request evidence from the manufacturer/supplier that the product is effective against:
Before starting the application, you should read our guide (document above). This explains what information you need to provide.
Before you begin these sessions, we recommend you download a current copy of the appropriate Kiwi Park model for your school from the Ministry website.
Before you enrol, you can ask questions to make sure you understand all costs and payments.
Before you make an OIA request
Before you start making a claim
Before you start your application, check you are applying for the right type of allowance and that you meet the criteria.
Before you start, it is important to understand the different types of early learning options available. That way you can enrol your child at one that suits your
Before you undertake any building work at the centre (including the building of fences or outdoor play structures), the local council should be contacted to see if building consent is required.
Begin preparing the plan that you will follow throughout the procurement process.
Beginning and ceasing to offer 20 Hours ECE funding: 4-5
Behaviour code of conduct
Being out of New Zealand could change what allowance you receive:
Being outside the licensed premises whilst receiving education and care from the service but does not include an outing for the purposes of:
Being outside the licensed premises whilst receiving education and care from the services but does not include an outing for the purposes of:
Below are some additional sources of information for support around hazard and risk management.
Below are some additional sources of information for support around risk management:
Below are some examples of an enrolment form and attendance record. The examples include mandatory requirement. You could consider adding information, changing the layout, wording, titles and so on to suit your own playgroup.
Below are some suggestions for uses of Component A funding:
Below are some suggestions for uses of Component B funding:
Below are some suggestions for uses of Component C funding:
Below are some suggestions for uses of Component D funding:
Below is the August attendance register for Kristen:
Below is the February attendance register for Vijay:
Below is the number of hours Sione attended each day during November:
Below shows the funding process for services claiming their first advance of 20 Hours ECE funding.
Beware of environmental noise from outside the home such as road works or construction nearby and try to ensure that negative effects are reduced where possible. If possible, the educator should attempt to ascertain the length of time the noise might occur and if appropriate make contingency plans:
Beware of environmental noise from outside the service such as road works or construction nearby and try to ensure that the negative effect is reduced where possible.
Beware of environmental noise from outside the service such as roadworks or construction nearby and try to ensure that the negative effect is reduced where possible.
Beware of plantings (trees) and placement of moveable equipment that negate the height of the fence.
Big changes can lead to your child having strong emotions about school. If your child doesn't want to go to school, it's important to offer them support as early as possible.
Black '6' on white background
Black 'a' on a white background
Black 'a' on white background
Black 'tick' on a white background
Black hash on white background
Black tick on white background
Blisters on the body which burst and turn into scabby sores
Boarding allowances application
Boarding allowances for Years 9 to 13
Boards can close their school for an additional 4 half-days per year that need to be made up, for purposes to be determined by the board based on the criteria for closing.
Boards cannot offset under and overuse during the course of the school year.
Boards have ministerial approval to close their schools for instruction during term time for up to 4 half-days per year.
Boards have statutory responsibilities to operate enrolment schemes. They are governed under sections 71-75 and schedule 20 of the Education and Training Act 2020.
Boards may vary the start and end time of the school day but must first consult with parents, staff and their community. They do not need approval from us.
Boards members of state and state-integrated schools and
Boards must implement the finalised scheme. Enrolment schemes can be amended and remain in place until the Secretary decides that it is no longer necessary to have an enrolment scheme in place to manage overcrowding in that school. The Board remains responsible for the day-to-day administration of an enrolment scheme (for example, determining the number of places available for out-of-zone students).
Boards of state and state-integrated schools and kura must follow regulations when setting term dates and opening times.
Boards of state or integrated schools wishing to open an early childhood education (ECE) service must establish a separate legal entity for the ECE service.
Books or other items to entertain children if there are any delays.
Breaks/absences of 15 minutes or more must be recorded on the Staff Record to maintain transparency and may be counted as one discretionary hour.
Breaks/absences under 15 minutes do not need to be recorded on the Staff Record.
Briefing Note Ministry response to the ERO report on new teachers
Briefing Note: Overview of the Teaching Council's functions
Briefing note - Cabinet paper August 2021 (English)
Briefing notes and reports
Broken glass presents a safety risk to children and adults. Children can be seriously injured if they fall against or strike unprotected windows, doors and mirrors. The most effective way of ensuring children and adults do not receive injuries from broken glass is to either prevent the glass from being broken or by ensuring that if the glass is broken it does not cut or pierce the skin.
Budget 24 provides $1.3 billion in focused supports for the education sector. This funding will lift achievement and provide a world leading education for every child.
Budget 24 provides a $53 million investment in the teacher workforce of the future.
Building stronger links between services, parents and
Building teacher capability to meet diverse learning needs.
Buildings constructed offsite and delivered to schools are flexible and can be designed for teaching, staff and student support spaces.
Bulletins and newsletters
Bullying can be serious. You can report bullying to the police if it involves:
Bullying can be verbal, physical or involve harming people's reputation or relationships. It can happen in person or online.
Bullying is a deliberately harmful behaviour directed at a person or group. It can be visible but often takes place out of sight. It involves a power imbalance and is usually repeated over time. It is different to
Bullying: help and support for your child
Bunk beds and elevated beds
Bunk beds are those where multiple beds are stacked on top of each other and the upper surface of the mattress is 700mm or more above the floor.
Bunk beds are those where multiple beds are stacked on top of each other and the upper surface of the mattress is 700mm or more above the floor. Elevated beds are those where the upper surface of the mattress is 700mm or more above the floor.
Bus controller for head schools
Bus controllers are the point of contact for students, parents or caregivers and the school's Transport Delivery Advisor (TDA) for all school transport issues. They also supervise loading and unloading of the bus at their school.
Bus controllers must be trained. This can be done online on our education learning management system.
Bus safety and behaviour management
But again, that will be down to a school,
But have a fantastic day. Thank you very much.
But in the primary setting, when you're sort
But it is, it historically has been in, in school policy.
But some schools have a policy of starting children at school together as a group at the start of each term (cohort entry).
But there is, um, for students with learning support needs,
But yeah, just a reminder, anything
But yeah, just to reiterate, three thresholds
But yeah, we would definitely do our best
But, um, so with that said,
But, um, yeah, we will look to, uh, formally
By paying at least the salary amounts specified in these four salary scales to all employed certificated teachers, Education and Care and Hospital-based services are eligible for higher funding rates. Please note the updated names for the salary scales and the addition of the Full Parity Salary Scale.
By signing this declaration, I am confirming that this funding claim is made in accordance with the conditions outlined in the current Early Childhood Education Funding Handbook and that the Ministry can withhold all or some of the funding if there is a breach of any of these conditions.
By submitting, posting or displaying your content on any of our social media accounts, you grant the Ministry of Education a non-exclusive, transferable, sub-licensable, royalty-free, worldwide licence to use that content.
C1 Curriculum consistency
C10 Developing social competence
C12 Opportunities for parents
C2 Developing social competence
C5 Acknowledgement of tangata whenua
C8 Language-rich environment
CERT NZ has advice for protecting your network attached storage (NAS):
CERT NZ has guidance on how to enforce the principle of least privilege and how to decide which permissions to give.
Cabinet Paper CAB-24-MIN-0471 Minister Stanford
Cabinet Paper CAB-24-MIN-0499 University Freedom of Speech Legislation
Cabinet Paper and Minutes - Scope and Terms of Reference of the Review (September 2021)
Cabinet agreed on 16 December 2024 to amend the Education and Training Act so that:
Cabinet paper CAB-24-MIN-0234 Minister Stanford Improved teacher training
Cabinet paper Report back and recommendations for change: Braille
Cabinet paper: Attendance action plan - second phase initiatives
Cabinet paper: Report back, recommendations for change (EN)
Calculate the FCH claim using the actual booked hours for the day(s) of emergency closure.
Calculating 20 hours ECE entitlement
Calculating advance days: 9-5
Calculating funded child hours for 20 Hours ECE Funding: 9-3
Calculating funded child hours for the ECE Funding Subsidy: 9-2
Calculating pay parity salary steps
Calculating staff hours for the RS7 Return: 9-4
Calculating the 20 Hours ECE Funding: 9-3
Calculating the ECE Funding Subsidy: 9-2
Calculating the Staff Hour Count: 9-4
Caleb is enrolled in a home-based service from 7.45am to 3.45pm on Mondays and Fridays, and 7.45am to 12.45pm on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays. He is also enrolled in kindergarten from 12.45 to 3.45pm on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays. His parents choose to allocate 20 Hours ECE hours to both the home-based service and the kindergarten. This might look like:
Calendar invites should be sent to the IT lead to remind them to:
Call the Ministry of Health's free helpline to enrol with your local Community Oral Health Service.
Call their parents or emergency contact to either come home or collect them as soon as possible.
Cambridge International in New Zealand
Campylobacter: 1 to 10 days
Can I sign up for Cloudflare?
Can count 1 staff member towards requirement
Can it be cleaned easily?
Can see it? Good. Okay. Cool. Bananas.
Can you just outline, um,
Canterbury Westland Kindergarten Association Incorporated
Canterbury, Chatham Islands
Careers New Zealand provides information and advice to help you make good decisions about work, study and training. It also provides information about scholarships.
Careful positioning of the educator to ensure they are observing the children and are close enough to intervene promptly to prevent injury.
Careful supervision is necessary for young children if there are hot taps in the bathroom to prevent scalding. Older children can be taught about hot water safety.
Carefully read the terms and conditions of use. Many AI models will reuse your prompts and the data you provide it to continue to learn and train. Make sure you do not enter copyright, confidential, personal, or sensitive information into these models.
Caregivers are primarily responsible for getting their children to school, but for some students, where distance is a barrier to getting to school or kura, transport assistance may be available.
Caregivers need to complete the SESTA review request form below and send it to us.
Caregivers, service providers, and the Ministry all have a role in ensuring SESTA services operate efficiently and meet the needs of students.
Caroline Adams (Palmerston North)
Carrying out daily hazard checks and addressing any identified risks is an important part of ensuring attending children experience a safe and healthy learning environment. The person responsible does not have to carry out the daily checks, but they must ensure that day-to-day health and safety risks and hazards are identified, and appropriate steps are taken to ensure any associated actions to keep children safe have been taken.
Casual Education and Care Services.
Casual education and care service
Casual education and care services.
Casually and conditionally enrolled children
Catalogue of tools and online services
Catchment plans support conversations about long-term planning and investment with these stakeholders and drive greater collaboration and joined up planning.
Categories of medicine for criterion HS28
Caution when completing the attestation for certificated teachers' salaries
Censor classifications can be used as a guide, however material should be listened to or previewed to check for suitability before sharing it with children.
Censor classifications can be used as a guide, however you should preview or listen to material to check for suitability before sharing it with children.
Censor classifications can be used as a guide. However, any material should be checked for suitability before sharing it with children.
Censor classifications on DVDs and games can be used as a guide, however material should be listened to or previewed to check for suitability before sharing it with children.
Central Kids Kindergarten Trust
Central Pacific not further defined.
Centralised use of funding should only take place with the full agreement of the service to which the ATIS is due.
Centre-based ECE excursion planning checklist
Centre-based ECE excursion risk assessment
Centre-based ECE licensing criterion HS26 requires that the actions specified in this appendix are taken for any person (adult or child) suffering from particular infectious diseases.
Centre-based ECE licensing criterion HS28 requires parental consent for administering medicine, following the requirements for each category.
Centre-based ECE record of special excursions
Centre-based daily hazard checklist
Centre-based early learning services include:
Centre-based, teacher-led services
Centres are required to keep a record of each emergency drill. At a minimum, this should record:
Centres have indoor and outdoor areas. The outdoor play areas are open all year, including in winter. The indoor spaces may be separated into activity areas such as dress-up clothes, books, building blocks, or musical instruments.
Centres have to use clean sheets and blankets that are not shared between children. They must also provide safe bedding. An example is no pillows for children under 2.
Centres in rural or isolated areas that are not on a town water supply and use bores or water tanks must meet the Drinking Water Standards for New Zealand.
Centres must ensure that children who sit or stand when they wake have room to do so. Children who can pull themselves to a standing position should not be placed in the top cot for safety reasons.
Centres must ensure that during cooking activities children are closely supervised if they are to have access to the fridge and, if possible, any medicines are stored out of the reach of children.
Centres must have a child protection policy that meets the Children's Act's requirements.
Centres must make the policy and information about its practices available to parents as required by criterion GMA2 Parent access to information.
Centres need adequate facilities to cater for occasions when an older child needs to rest or sleep. How a service provides these facilities depends on what suits their particular centre layout and operation.
Centres need to be designed and laid out so the physical environment supports the way the curriculum can be provided. Activity spaces need to be configured to allow for a range of learning experiences, as well as meeting the minimum space per child requirement. Centres must have sufficient indoor space for group learning, and outdoor space must be of a size and shape that does not restrict different kinds of physical activity.
Centres need to decide who provides any infant formula and bottles. If formula is provided, parental approval of the brand/type is required before it is used. If the usual brand/type is unavailable, parental approval of any substitute is also required prior to use.
Centres need to ensure there is adequate hygienic storage for this purpose such as wall hooks for linen bags. A cupboard or area which children cannot access is useful.
Centres need to first determine which emergency drills are relevant to their location and carry out each type of drill with children (as appropriate) on an, at least, 3-monthly basis.
Centres need to first determine which emergency drills are relevant to their location, and then carry each of these drills out with children at least every 3 months.
Centres should consider children with additional needs.
Centres should consider the age of the children at the service and ensure there are sufficient low-level cots for them to move into as they grow.
Centres should have a policy and procedure in regard to alcohol and other substances for staff, volunteers, parents and visitors to the centre.
Centres should take all reasonable steps to ensure equipment is kept in good repair and maintained regularly. A regular inspection programme to ensure equipment and surfacing are properly maintained is advised. This will ensure any necessary repairs and maintenance can be completed promptly.
Centres should talk with regional Ministry of Education ECE licensing staff and Fire and Emergency New Zealand personnel about the best options for their particular situation.
Centres will need to ensure that animals, including those brought to the centre, can be properly restrained at all times. This could include a procedure outlining:
Centres with large outdoor areas may also consider securing an additional first aid kit in an outdoor storage area for quick access.
Centres/services cannot rely on a safety check done by a different employer (either current or previous) as the check was not done on their behalf. They must carry out all of the components themselves.
Centres/services that engage a relief teacher independently (that is, not through an agency) will need to complete the safety check. Once this has been done, the completed check can be relied on for up to 3 years by the centre/service.
Certificated (ratio) staff: 3-B-2
Certificated Playgroup funding is not covered in this Handbook.
Certificated Playgroups are not eligible to receive targeted funding.
Certificated Teacher Hours are the total number of hours worked by all certificated teachers in a service at times when they were counted towards regulated (ratio) staff.
Certificated and Other Teacher Hour claims
Certificated kaiako eligibility
Certificated playgroups and licence-exempt services
Certificated playgroups are not eligible to receive equity funding.
Certificated teacher absences and discretionary hours
Certificated teacher eligibility
Certificated teacher hours
Certificated teacher hours: 3-B-2
Certificated teacher: 3-B-2
Certificated teachers are eligible to receive their allowance while on paid leave for their usual days worked.
Certificated teachers cannot receive more than one full allowance entitlement.
Certificated teachers in a management position will enter the salary scale on the K2, K3 or K4 salary step, regardless of their qualifications or teaching experience.
Certificated teachers permanently employed in a teaching role or management position [as per the all employed teacher definition], must be paid at least the applicable salary amounts on the Minimum Salary Scales for Certificated Teachers, according to their qualifications, recognised service and previous relevant work experience for all employed hours. This includes rostered hours, non-contact, staff meetings, paid professional learning and development.
Certificated teachers who are appointed to a Management Position will enter the salary scale on the management salary step.
Certificated teachers who work across more than one eligible service will receive the allowance at a pro-rata rate.
Certificates are issued to Playgroups under the Education (Playgroups) Regulations 2008.
Certificates set the standard for curriculum, ratio, premises and facilities, health and safety practices and administration.
Certification Criteria for Playgroups 2008
Certification criteria assess if playgroups meet minimum standards set by the Education (Playgroups) Regulations 2008 to retain their certificate.
Certification criteria for playgroups
Certified copies of qualifications are required. These can be certified by:
Certify that specific information is correct by signing the attestation section of the enrolment agreement form for this purpose.
Certify what criteria an education and care service or hospital-based service is using to determine the minimum salaries it pays to all employed certificated teachers.
Change default or weak passwords to long passphrases.
Change in requirements from 1 January 2011
Change of bus controller form
Change of information for a SESTA student user guide
Change your bus controller
Changes that have not been signed by a parent/guardian will not be considered changed for funding purposes.
Changes to a service provider bank account must be made using an RS2 change of bank account form.
Changes to enrolment schemes
Changes to on-duty adults
Changes to the Education and Training Act 2020 to progress priorities and support the health of the education system
Changing optional charge agreements
Changing the funding rates
Chapter 1 - How to use this handbook
Chapter 10: Equity funding
Chapter 11: Record keeping
Chapter 12: Financial reporting
Chapter 13: Targeted Funding for Disadvantage
Chapter 14: Collection of information
Chapter 2-7 Recovery of early childhood education funding
Chapter 2: How the Ministry funds services
Chapter 3 contains further information on the ECE Funding Subsidy.
Chapter 3: The ECE Funding Subsidy
Chapter 4 contains eligibility requirements for 20 Hours ECE.
Chapter 4: 20 Hours Early Childhood Education
Chapter 5 contains further information on the ATIS.
Chapter 5: Other ECE funding
Chapter 6 of the ECE funding handbook details what is required in keeping attendance records. Attendance records may be kept in a form to suit the service.
Chapter 6: Recording enrolment, attendance and absence
Chapter 7-5 Emergency Closure
Chapter 7: Special circumstances
Chapter 9: Completing the RS7 return
Charges for enrolment and joining a waiting list are not subsidised.
Charter School Agency website
Charter schools are a new type of state-funded school operated under a contract between the Crown and a sponsor (an organisation or business approved by the independent Charter School Authorisation Board).
Chartered Accountants of Australia and New Zealand
Check for duplicate codes column G to column CR or omitted codes school trial balance input column I.
Check out our range of guides, helping you to plan for the diverse learning and wellbeing needs of all
Check out our range of online resources designed for parents and young people to build your online safety knowledge.
Check that all trial balance codes are mapped. See trial balance converters cell G 12 and school trial balance input column I.
Check that at least 1 'person responsible' is on the premises supervising the adults and children at all times.
Check that column C, D, E and F all equal zero by selecting each column header and save the blank file
Check that cups and eating utensils are washed thoroughly in hot water.
Check that the downloaded financial statements are blank.
Check the amount of your entitlement first
Check the financial statements are really blank.
Check with your service about what you need to pay if some services are not provided at times, such as food. This could be during a holiday period.
Check you are an authorized user of the School Data Portal.
Check you have the signed original documents at hand as per the checklist.
Check your figures from your worksheet section by section.
Checklist of actions for Term 2
Child Disability Allowance documentation
Child Matters also has information on how to handle disclosures of child abuse, and indicators of child abuse.
Child Protection Policy for the Ministry of Education
Child health and wellbeing
Child information collected
Child protection eLearning resource
Child protection in schools
Child protection online training
Child protection policies for early learning services
Child protection policies for schools
Child's Matters' 'Creating a Safe Organisation' resource has guidance on developing child protection policies and safe working practices.
Childcare centre budget template
Childcare subsidy and 20 hours ECE
Children and adults who handle animals need to practice sound handwashing procedures afterwards.
Children and educators use their first languages and extend their vocabularies in both
Children are actively engaged in investigation and sustained exploration.
Children are allowed to stand on school buses.
Children are aware of their own ancestral heritage and the history of
Children are only offered genuine choice.
Children are seated while eating
Children are supervised and seated while eating.
Children are supervised while eating
Children are supported by educators to be actively involved in assessing their own learning, doing things such as telling their own learning stories.
Children are washed when they are soiled or pose a health risk to themselves or others.
Children can no longer attend a service after its licence is cancelled.
Children can still attend the service while the issue is addressed.
Children cannot attend a service while a licence is suspended.
Children cannot be in a position to leave the licensed premises without the knowledge of the educator.
Children display a strong sense of environmental awareness and care, including consideration of both the natural (living) world and the physical (non-living) environment.
Children eating outside need protection from the sun during this time. If possible, locate outdoor eating places under trees, shade sails, covered decks, sun umbrellas and covered pergolas.
Children enrolled on Fridays are not automatically enrolled on Good Friday unless Good Friday is specifically cited in their enrolment agreement.
Children enrolled on Mondays are not automatically enrolled on Labour Day unless Labour Day is specifically cited in their enrolment agreement.
Children gaining confidence in, and control of their bodies, and developing an understanding of how to keep physically healthy, is an important aspect of learning which playgroups are required to support.
Children have appropriate access to varied environments that they can explore and investigate.
Children have opportunities to share aspects of their culture with others in the service.
Children interact positively with other children of different ages, backgrounds, gender, abilities and/or ethnic groups.
Children know the limits and boundaries of acceptable behaviour.
Children learn about the history of local
Children learn by interacting with people and with their environment. The furniture, equipment and resources provided for children will have an impact upon their learning, and how they view themselves and others.
Children learn by interacting with people and with their environment. The furniture, equipment, and resources provided for children will have an impact upon their learning and how they view themselves and others.
Children learn by interacting with people and with their environment. The furniture, equipment, and resources provided for children will have an impact upon their learning.
Children learn by interacting with people and with their environment. The furniture, equipment, and resources you provide will influence their learning and the way they view themselves and others. Your choice of furniture, equipment and resources can help you to meet the curriculum standard.
Children learn through all their senses, so select some play items that encourage the use of smell, touch, sound and vision.
Children may be enrolled at more than 1 early childhood education (ECE) service but funding cannot be claimed by 2 services for the same hours of attendance. Parents/guardians must attest that their child is not enrolled at another service for the same times (see Section 6-1 for more details on enrolment records).
Children may be enrolled into a service even if a parent/caregiver cannot provide identity documentation.
Children may not be counted as participating when they are in emergency attendance, in an operating theatre, in a neonatal unit or are taking part in an activity initiated by a person other than an adult providing education and care.
Children may share a child-place during the day.
Children must not be enrolled for the same times (e.g. between 9am and 1pm on Mondays) at more than 1 service.
Children not having access to liquids or food while in bed.
Children participate in decisions that affect them, choosing their own challenges and learning opportunities from a range of resources and equipment.
Children play, grow and feel the world around them."
Children receiving 20 Hours ECE cannot receive childcare assistance from Work and Income for the hours of 20 Hours ECE. The only exception is when home-based educator top up payments are applied for the hours of 20 Hours ECE. Families may be eligible for childcare assistance from Work and Income to help with the cost of home-based educator top up payments.
Children receiving any 20 Hours ECE at your service must not be included in the 2 and overs estimate. Count them separately as your 20 Hours ECE funding.
Children require sufficient restful sleep to become self-managing, be effective learners and to make the most of the learning opportunities provided by ECE. Services are encouraged to actively engage in discussions with parents for guidance on the sleep requirements for their child and how these can best be met in a manner consistent with the regulations. The designated space(s) should recognise cultural practices of the communities.
Children should always be supervised at play, both indoors and outdoors, and especially where there are carpentry tools or water play.
Children sitting directly on grass or safety surfaces such as bark or matting should be encouraged to keep uncovered food on a plate or in their lunch box. This will reduce the chance of food becoming contaminated from contact with the ground.
Children sometimes sweat when they sleep, and bed-wetting accidents do occur from time to time. Damp or soiled mattresses can be a breeding ground for bacteria.
Children under 6 years of age who are enrolled at an ECE service may attend school as part of a transitional school visit.
Children use a variety of ways to communicate, including non-verbal communication through art, movement and music.
Children usually eat main meals together in a dedicated eating space. Some centres will also do snack time together. Others will make
Children who are 5 years old do not legally need to be enrolled at a school yet. If your child is 5 when you apply for an exemption, it will come into effect when they turn 6.
Children who are Deaf or hard of hearing can get support with their education until they leave school.
Children who are Deaf or hard of hearing have long term or permanent hearing loss. This could be in 1 or both ears and includes auditory neuropathy disorder. We can provide support from identification of hearing loss until the end of school.
Children who are able to sit or stand up are not to be placed in the upper level of multi-level cots, as they could be injured or fall from the cot when attempting to get up. Once children are too large or mobile for the multi-level cots, they are to be moved either to a single level cot or to a stretcher or a bed.
Children who are able to stand up are not to be placed in portable cots as the portable cot could tip over when a child stands, and the child could be injured.
Children who are enrolled at more than 1 early childhood service.
Children who have strong emotions about school or changes in their lives may start showing signs through:
Children with learning support needs or health problems may be absent more frequently. Services may apply for an exemption to the Frequent Absence Rule for these children.
Children with learning support needs or health problems may need to be absent for more than 3 weeks. Services can apply for an exemption to the Three Week Rule for these children.
Children with learning support needs or health problems who are enrolled at 2 services for the same hours of attendance cannot be funded for absences at both services.
Children with special health and/or educational needs are fully engaged in the programme.
Children without learning support needs or health problems but who have parents or siblings with
Children's Act 2014 guide
Children's independence and dignity
Children's workers who lived overseas for more than 1 year within the last 10 years should provide a Police certificate from the country where they lived.
Children, who can sit, are able to safely sit up in the lower level of the cots (HS10).
Choosing an early learning service
Christchurch - 48 Hereford Street
Christian Education New Zealand Foundation Trust
Christmas coverage: Options for all services
Circumstances in Which Boards May Close the Schools They Administer Under the Education (When State Schools Must be Open and Closed) Regulations 2024 - 2024-sl6464- New Zealand Gazette
Claim the bus controller allowance
Claiming for 20 hours ECE absences
Claiming the Support Grant for Provisionally Registered Teachers (removed April 2015): 9-7
Clean individual bedding (such as blankets, sheets, sleeping bags and pillowslips) is provided for sleeping or resting children that is sufficient to keep them warm.
Clearly identify the parent or guardian who verified the record.
Click 'Download certificate'.
Click on File, scroll down to Print, select your preferred printer and the quantity required and click on the Print icon.
Click on the link to view the contents of the circular.
Close all Excel worksheets and open last year's audited model and this year's blank model.
Close contact with oral secretions. (Coughing, sneezing, and so on)
Closures are normally for 1 or 2 days only.
Cochlear Implant Programmes.
Code Compliance Certificate issued under Section 95 of the Building Act 2004 for any building work undertaken, or alternatively any other documentation that shows evidence of compliance.
Code Compliance Certificate issued under Section 95 of the Building Act 2004 for any building work undertaken, or alternatively, any other documentation that shows evidence of compliance.
Code of conduct for students
Cohort entry is where children start school for the first time in groups on set dates, rather than on or after their fifth birthday.
Cohort or group entry for children starting school
Collate the individual home-based educator absences that have occurred due to a non-controllable health and safety issue stemming from an infectious disease, for the last calendar month into the EC30 HB.
Collecting daily attendance data will bring more attention to and awareness about what is happening across school attendance. It will help us identify earlier what schools might need support.
Collecting information from other sources
Collection of ECE census information as a condition of funding
Collection of attendance and enrolment information as a condition of funding
Column H is for the school to add their own non-cash adjustments.
Commercial COI declaration
Common systems that use passwordless authentication include:
Communicating with parents about attendance
Communication with parents and families in newsletters or placing information on a website.
Communication with parents and families, via noticeboards and in newsletters.
Communities of Learning guide
Commuter Waka shows regional data about how people travel for work and school.
Complaints about a learning support service
Complaints about other education organisations
Complaints about the Ministry of Education
Complaints can be about a statutory appointee working in a school. This may be a specialist advisor, limited statutory manager or a commissioner.
Complaints could come from a variety of sources:
Complaints in early learning
Complaints policies and procedures
Complaints relating to employment disputes may need a different process or another agency.
Complaints will vary from minor to major and may escalate rapidly from one to the other unless they are well managed.
Complaints will vary from minor to major, and may escalate rapidly from one to the other unless they are well managed.
Complete conflict of interest declarations
Complete due diligence checks on the preferred supplier and document your findings.
Complete initial checks and evaluate the offers you have received to identify the preferred supplier.
Complete the above steps for the children who are 2 Years and Over.
Complete the exercise until you balance the worksheet.
Completed EC12 and EC13 Forms.
Completed EC20 forms must be returned to the ECE Operational Funding team.
Completing the RS3 form: 7-2
Completing the RS7 return
Completing the RS7 return (all services): Chapter 9
Completing the advance days
Completing the attestation for certificated teachers' salaries
Complex shapes break up and scatter sound waves, reducing noise reverberation in the room.
Complex shapes. Complex shapes break up and scatter sound waves, reducing noise reverberation in the room. Practical examples are:
Component A: Low socio-economic communities
Component A: Low socio-economic communities: 10-2
Component B is combined with Component A: Low Socio-economic Communities for eligibility and entitlement purposes. This is because there is a prevalence of children from non-English speaking backgrounds in low socio-economic communities.
Component B: Special needs and non-English speaking backgrounds: 10-3
Component B: Special needs, and non-English speaking backgrounds (including sign-language)
Component C: Language and culture other than English
Component C: Language and culture other than English (including sign language) provides targeted funding to support those services providing bicultural/immersion education and care programmes.
Component C: Language and culture other than English (including sign language): 10-4
Component D: Isolation recognises that isolated services will face higher costs when accessing goods and services.
Component D: Isolation: 10-5
Components of the safety check
Condition assessors visit schools and kura to assess site-wide and building elements. They make their assessment against an established condition assessment framework. Using this framework means consistent, repeatable, and comparable data is recorded across the school and portfolio.
Conditional enrolment 6-2 (removed May 2016)
Conditional or context-aware 2FA
Conditions of contract for consultancy services
Confirmed Auckland ballot dates for 2025.
Conflict of Interest declaration and management plan
Conflicts of interest in property procurement
Conflicts of interest must be properly managed.
Conflicts of interest when buying goods and services
Confront systemic racism and discrimination in education.
Connections and endorsement
Connections that are easy to unclip and re-clip allow furniture to be moved when needed. Consider placing fastening points at several places around the walls.
Connections that are easy to unclip and re-clip allow furniture to moved when needed. Fastening points can be placed at several places around the walls (in some buildings).
Connections that are easy to unclip and re-clip allow you to move furniture when you need to. You can place fastening points at several places around the walls (in some buildings).
Consecutive days, including weekends and public holidays.
Consequences of not safety checking
Consider a balance between natural products and man-made equipment and materials. Plastic products are usually cheaper and easy to clean, but they do not usually last as long or have the same aesthetic appeal as products made from natural materials.
Consider a balance between natural products and man-made equipment and materials. Quality is an important consideration when you are choosing equipment and materials. Think about the following in relation to the equipment you use:
Consider a sequential approach to hazard and risk management. For example:
Consider how the furniture, equipment and resources you provide in the centre will:
Consider how the furniture, equipment, and resources you provide in a hospital-based service will:
Consider how the furniture, equipment, and resources you provide in the home will:
Consider in particular the style of the tap, as children bend over the hand basins often to wash hands.
Consider structuring your school AI policy to include guidance on:
Consider the travel arrangements and hazards identified at the destination when determining your adult:child ratios.
Consider the travel arrangements and hazards identified on the way to and at the destination when determining adult:child ratios.
Consider the use of software programmes available to support safe searching techniques.
Consider using more than 1 room in the home to have children sleeping if this is possible. It can be difficult to provide undisturbed sleep for a child if other children in the same room are unsettled.
Consider what options to provide where there is a risk of injury to staff (such as lifting heavy or tall children).
Consider whether ratios need to be improved if any part of the excursion is in the vicinity of an unprotected source of water.
Consideration also needs to be given to the location of the sleep space in the home so the educator can maintain effective supervision of other children while monitoring sleeping children. See HS8 Sleep monitoring.
Consideration may be needed to ensure supervision requirements can be met.
Consideration needs to be given to the number of children attending each home and the probability of multiple children needing to sleep/rest at the same time, particularly if there is more than one child under the age of 2 in care at the same time.
Consideration of hazards must include but is not limited to:
Consideration of whether prosecution is an appropriate action will be in accordance with our Prosecution and Warnings Policy.
Consideration should be given as to how children will be kept warm and dry if evacuation takes place during wet or windy weather. Centres may be able to make some arrangement with a nearby business or other organisation to assist with this.
Consideration should be given as to how children will be kept warm and dry if evacuation takes place during wet or windy weather. Playgroups may be able to make some arrangement with a nearby business or other organisation to assist with this.
Considerations might vary depending on, for example:
Considerations when deciding upon the provision of staff space should include:
Considerations would need to include:
Consistent robust safety checking helps assess whether people might pose a risk to children.
Consolidated reports for service providers
Construction directory information for suppliers
Consult with key stakeholders to understand all needs. Stakeholders could include:
Consultancy services - contract special conditions agreement
Consultancy/professional services
Consultation is needed to make a decision on your request.
Consultation material provided to targeted stakeholders.
Consultation on long-term insights briefing topic
Consultation on proposals to clarify obligations and strategic priorities for school boards
Consultation open for draft relationships and sexuality education framework
Consultation: Initial Teacher Education standard setting/approval
Consulting communities about changes to schools
Consulting on draft relationships and sexuality education framework
Contact an education advisor at your regional Ministry of Education office.
Contact details for the Ministry, including regional and district offices, and learning support.
Contact information for the Ministry of Education's national office.
Contact numbers for people seeking information about the group
Contact our learning support team
Contact our media team. We monitor emails after hours.
Contact our service desk to get access.
Contact our team for support, or if you would like to apply for transport assistance funding for your
Contact the NZQA Qualification Evaluation Service on
Contact the Trust for more information on how
Contact the school transport team directly.
Contact the service to arrange a visit.
Contact the traumatic incident team if your school or ECE needs support to manage a crisis.
Contact us for more information about the EEL.
Contact us if you have not received your allowance or have a question.
Contact us through New Zealand Relay
Contact with infected skin, bedding and clothing
Contact with secretions from infected people
Contact with secretions of a sore throat. (Coughing, sneezing and so on)
Contact your Ministry regional office at the first available opportunity.
Contact your Ministry regional office for more details regarding a change of service provider or for other licensing requirements.
Contact your Ministry regional office for more details.
Contact your Ministry regional office for more information.
Contact your education advisor at your regional Ministry of Education office for more information on any of the above areas.
Contact your local public health unit for further advice about dishwashers for ECE centres.
Contact your public health service for more information and advice.
Contact your regional Ministry of Education office to determine what steps would need to be taken in exceptional circumstances such as these.
Contact your regional Ministry of Education office. They can help you work with your school if you haven't been able to resolve the issue.
Contact your regional office for more information.
Contact your regional office.
Contact your school if you have any questions about transport assistance. If your school has a bus service, they will have a staff member that acts as their bus controller.
Contact your school payroll administrator.
Contaminated food or water, contact with an infected person
Contaminated food or water, direct spread from an infected person or animal
Contaminated food or water, unpasteurised milk
Continuing with learning support when moving to the next school level
Contract works price analysis workbook
Contract works registration of interest
Contract works request for tender
Contract works schedule of prices
Contract-Works-Request-for-Quote
Contract-Works-Request-for-Quote - Lite
Contractors and suppliers must follow the New Zealand Building Code and also meet our school-specific durability requirements, including:
Contractors and suppliers must meet our weathertightness standards for new school buildings.
Contractors who are not children's workers but are likely to have unsupervised access to students at the school during normal school hours must undergo a Police vet and risk assessment. That includes contractors who work on construction projects managed by your school or by us during school hours.
Contractors who will not have unsupervised access to students at the school during normal school hours do not need a Police vet.
Contracts for construction works
Contracts for consultancy services
Conversely, with the explained,
Conveyance Allowance - change of information user guide
Cooking and/or heating food
Cool. Thank you very much.
Cooperative ventures and achievements are valued and encouraged.
Coordinators and educators must not use, or be under the influence of, alcohol or any other substance that has a detrimental effect on their functioning or behaviour while responsible for children attending the service.
Copies of ECE qualifications
Copies of New Zealand primary teacher qualifications (Teacher-Led services only).
Copies of Teaching Council endorsements
Copies of current first aid (or medical practicing) certificates for adults counting towards this requirement.
Copies of current first aid (or medical practising) certificates for adults counting towards this requirement.
Copies of overseas qualifications and NZQA assessment of these
Copies of overseas qualifications and the NZQA assessment of those qualifications (Teacher-Led services only).
Copies of practising certificates
Copies of practising certificates and Early Childhood qualifications (Teacher-Led services only).
Copies of practising certificates are used by the Ministry to:
Copies of primary qualifications
Copies of safety standards can be purchased from Standards NZ.
Copies of the letter of registration with an ECE or primary endorsement from the New Zealand Teaching Council (Teacher-Led services only).
Copy of the current certificate issued to the hospital under the Health and Disability Services (Safety) Act 2001, and
Copy of the current certificate issued to the hospital under the Health and Disability Services (Safety) Act 2001; and
Copy paste value the old mapping to the new template, copy paste value the previous year trial balance and align the current year trial balance and save the new mapping conversion for the auditor.
Copyright information for material on this website and social media including material with third party copyright.
Copyright of third parties
Cordless phones are one of the most popular and practical types of phone used in early childhood education centres. The main advantages of cordless phones include being able to:
Core health unit standards 6401 and 6402 may also be considered for home-based services. They cover first aid for children and adults.
Corner Guinness and Albert Street
Costs must be itemised so parents can see how the optional charge is to be spent. Requesting a nominal hourly rate for unspecified excursions and transport does not meet the intent of an optional charge.
Costs such as fees or donations
Cots are easily accessible by staff and sufficiently separated to avoid cross infection (HS10)
Cots must have no gaps or protrusions that could trap an infant or catch their clothing and have no sharp edges. The sides must be high enough to stop an infant climbing out and there should be no footholds.
Coughing and sneezing. The virus may be passed from mother to child during pregnancy
Coughing, sneezing and contact with weeping blisters
Coughing, sneezing and infected saliva
Coughing, sneezing and poor hand washing
Coughing. Adults and older children can pass on the infection to babies
Count across the columns to ensure there are at least as many adults working as the number planned.
Count as 2 and Over hours all hours you would claim for 2-year-olds.
Counties Manukau Kindergarten Association Incorporated
Couriers, reception and postal address
CoveKinloch New Zealand Ltd (24 hours, 7 days a week)
Coverage: Entire South Island.
Craig Maclean (New Plymouth)
Create a staffing schedule to help you decide how many teachers you will need, and for what hours you will need them. This should be based on anticipated enrolments. This process will also help you decide how many of these staff must be qualified teachers.
Create the conditions for
Creating a data-driven funding model that is focused on delivering high-quality interventions, programmes, and supports.
Creating a password policy for your school
Creating a password policy guidance
Creating a portfolio for each child that is readily accessible to the child and his or her parents/caregivers. For more information on child portfolios, refer to the curriculum guidance.
Creating a social media connection with someone doesn't mean the Ministry endorses them regardless of the terms used by social media providers such as 'follow' or 'like'.
Creating a strong password
Creation of a portfolio on each child that is readily accessible to the child and his or her parents/caregivers.
Criteria are used to assess compliance with the minimum standards set by the regulations.
Criterion aims to uphold children's safety by ensuring that they are unable to access hazardous equipment or activities (such as hot food/liquid being transferred from the stove to the bench by a staff member whilst preparing a meal) unless adequately supervised.
Criterion ensures that there is a link between the prescribed curriculum framework and what happens at the service.
Critical health effect(s)
Crown agencies have developed a limitation policy to help protect your right to go to court from the effects of the Limitation Act 1950 and the Limitation Act 2010 while you are engaging with a Crown sensitive claims process.
Cryptosporidium: 1 to 12 days
Current Annual Building Warrant of Fitness (if the premises require a compliance schedule under Section 100 of the Building Act 2004).
Current appointed suppliers
Current approved qualifications for early learning teachers are listed on the Teaching Council of
Current directory of construction suppliers
Currently, National Student Numbers (NSN) can only be used for the purposes specified in Schedule 24 of the Act. Information privacy principle 13 of the Privacy Act 2020 also requires agencies to outline the group that the unique identifier will apply to, and only assign unique identifiers (such as NSNs or IRD numbers) if the agency needs it to carry out 1 or more of its functions efficiently.
Curriculum Insights and Progress (CIPS) Year 8
Curriculum criteria documentation required
Curriculum criteria for centre-based ECE services.
Curriculum criteria for home-based ECE services.
Curriculum criteria for hospital-based ECE services.
Curriculum criteria for playgroups.
Curriculum days for 2025 - 2024-sl6465- New Zealand Gazette
Curriculum delivery staffing
Curriculum goals and assessment practices are consistent with service philosophy.
Curriculum half-days 2025
Curriculum is interpreted broadly. It includes all the experiences, activities, and events (both direct and indirect) that occur within the service. It provides a framework that foregrounds the
Curriculum is interpreted broadly. It includes all the experiences, activities, and events, both direct and indirect that occur within the service. It provides a framework that foregrounds the mana of the child and the importance of respectful, reciprocal, and responsive relationships.
Curriculum planning sheet
Curriculum priorities that support social competence, emotional competence, and understanding of appropriate behaviour should provide ongoing opportunities for children to practice their growing capabilities, through actions, words, and behaviours.
Curriculum priorities that support social competence, emotional competence, and understandings of appropriate behaviour should provide ongoing opportunities for children to practice their growing capabilities, through actions, words, and behaviours.
Curriculum progress tools
Curriculum staffing entitlements may be:
Cushions or low barriers around a carpeted area can provide a space for babies or toddlers.
Cyberbullying usually goes in hand with in-person bullying. Cyberbullying is bullying with the use of digital technologies like social media.
D if they're internal appointments, then it will be n uh,
D those will be if they're external appointments,
Daily Bus Conveyance Allowance payment rates
Daily Bus Conveyance Allowance.
Daily and tech class school bus: roles and responsibilities guide
Daily attendance reporting
Daily school bus route maps
Daily sign-in/sign-out records are recommended as best practise.
Daily technology and school bus providers
Daily ward lists with a record of the names and ages of children eligible to participate.
Dannevirke Kindergarten Association
Date of Parents Attestation for 20 Hours ECE.
Date: Wednesday 7 May 2025
Days and time booked (enrolled to attend).
Days and time of operation
Days in the previous or following month.
Days the child attended for fewer hours than enrolled (and the number of hours the child attended).
Days the child attended their normal enrolled hours.
Days the child was enrolled to attend and was
Days the child was enrolled to attend and was absent and funding can be claimed.
Days the child was enrolled to attend and was absent and funding cannot be claimed.
Days the child was enrolled to attend and was absent.
Days the child was enrolled to attend.
Days the child was not enrolled to attend.
Deaf Aotearoa First Signs
Deaf Children New Zealand Tamariki Turi O Aotearoa
Dealing with persistent child absence
Decide on what actions need to be taken, how they will happen and who will be involved.
Decide what other staff will need to be employed (for example, cleaner, administration staff, manager, cook, head teacher).
Deciding which glassed areas are 'accessible to children' in the centre (and therefore need to be protected) should involve consideration of:
Decisions to seek specialist guidance is made in collaboration with others, including colleagues, parents, and medical staff, and is based on observational evidence.
Deed - Attribution-Non Commercial 4.0 International - Creative Commons
Definition of Deaf and hard of hearing
Definition of a children's worker
Definition of family members
Definition of home-based educator pass through
Definition of home-based educator top up payments
Definition of optional charges
Definitions in Children's Act 2014
Definitions of community-based and private services are available in the Glossary.
Delegated Authorisers will need to set up the School Planning and Reporting role for users as shown below.
Delegated representatives and the attestation on the RS7 return
Delivering more supports to support Pacific learners to plan for study and training after high school.
Delivering new resources to support Pacific learners to plan for study and training after high school.
Delivering the Unteach Racism programme.
Dentists do not come to early learning services, as they do for some schools. You will need to make your own appointments, and the Community Oral Health Service will tell you where to go.
Depending on how close the nearest school bus route is to your house, you might receive one type of assistance or both.
Depending on the schools in your area, you may have the choice to send your child to a single-sex or co-educational school.
Describe how children (walking and non-walking) will be managed during an emergency drill.
Design review deliverables checklist - bulk and location
Design review deliverables checklist - developed design
Design review deliverables checklist - masterplan
Design review deliverables checklist - preliminary design
Design review for new school builds and redevelopments
Design review for school builds and redevelopments
Design review is an important part of any large project. Our reviews focus on durability, resilience, and whole-of-life cost. We aim to make sure our schools meet the long-term needs of learners and teachers.
Design, strength and durability
Designated assembly areas for evacuation purposes outside the building keep children safe from further risk.
Designated assembly areas outside the building keep children safe from further risk.
Designation of the sleep space within the premises (and how non-sleeping children will be kept separate while the sleep area is in use).
Designing quality learning spaces
Designing school bus routes
Despite the fact that your playgroup may only meet once or twice a week, emergencies can occur at any time and playgroups, like all other ECE services, must be ready to respond appropriately.
Detailed guidance for Delegated Authorisers on how to set up new roles for users is available online.
Detailed guidance for home education applicants
Details of any actions that need to be taken to rectify faults discovered or to improve on the planned procedure.
Details of any actions that need to be taken to rectify faults discovered or to improve on the planned procedure. Keep the emergency drill records for 2 years.
Details of salary steps are in chapter 6 of the pay parity guide.
Details of the roles and responsibilities that will apply during an emergency situation.
Determining a teacher's initial salary step
Develop employment documentation such as policies and procedures.
Develop job descriptions. It may be useful to look at job descriptions from other ECE services, where possible.
Developing a network plan for specialist and alternative provision.
Developing schedules is quite tricky and you may need to try lots of versions before you find one that suits your service.
Development and consultation of school enrolment schemes
Diarrhoea (may be bloody), fever, stomach pain
Diarrhoea and vomiting illnesses
Did the evaluation process follow what was described in the procurement plan?
Did we answer the one from Anna?
Did you consider making a code for students who left early
Did you need help with anything?
Different accounts and logins must be set up for:
Different types of early learning services are open for different hours. Some are open all day while others are only open during school hours (usually 9am to 3pm) or half days.
Digital child protection resource
Direct and constant monitoring by the educator in close proximity to the children when supervising an activity with some element of risk, for example cooking experiences and any activity that is near water.
Direct any questions about the qualifications for Playcentres to your Playcentre regional support team or Ministry regional office.
Direct contact with an infected person
Direct contact with an infested person's hair, and less commonly by contact with contaminated surfaces and objects
Direct contact with animals or infected person
Direct contact with discharge from the eyes or with items contaminated by the discharge
Direct contact with infected person
Direct contact with infected sores
Direct spread from infected person
Direct, close and constant supervision by parents, caregivers and educators will be required if an activity includes an element of risk. For example, climbing, cooking, using ropes, cords or tools of any kind or activities near water.
Direct, close and constant supervision by teachers, educators and
Directed enrolments are permitted by the Education and Training Act 2020.
Directly resourced schools: Roles and responsibilities guide
Director of Education for Canterbury, Chatham Islands: Coralanne Child
Director of Education for Nelson, Marlborough, West Coast: Andrea Williams
Director of Education for Otago, Southland: David Tapp
Director of Education for Te Tai Tokerau: Hira Gage
Director of Education for Waikato: Marcus Freke
Director of Education for Wellington: Roy Sye
Disagreeing with a decision made on your request
Discipline and dismissal policies and procedures must be clear, reflect the requirements of current legislation and provide managers with useful guidance.
Discipline and dismissal procedures
Disclosure Checklist for Tier 1 Schools
Discretionary hours report
Discretionary hours reporting
Discretionary hours: Record keeping
Discretionary pathways registration
Discretionary situations for playcentres
Discuss exclusion of cases and contacts with public health service.
Discuss exclusion of cases and their contacts with public health service.
Discuss the procurement with your property advisor to get their support and confirm funding is available.
Discuss what visa requirement is needed with your school or the EPO.
Discuss with your staff how AI is used at your school and what rules and guidance you need to put in place for different contexts. It is best to adopt a practical, educative approach to AI and its uses.
Discussions and decisions about children's progress and achievements should include collaboration with parents and
Display materials in boxes, containers or baskets and group similar materials together so that children can quickly choose between them. Label containers clearly so that adults know where to put equipment. When setting up a playgroup session, create areas for the different activities and interests of the children, and set them up so children can move easily from one activity to the next.
Displaying the procedure ensures that every person using the facilities is made aware of the procedure to maintain general hygiene and children's safety and wellbeing.
Diversity is recognised. Schools and students with the greatest needs are prioritised.
Do I have to pay extra for food or nappies or supply them myself?
Do I have to pay for days or hours my child does not attend (for instance, if the child is sick, you are on holiday or the service is closed)?
Do all the vehicles have current registration and warrants of fitness?
Do children have access to the internet when at the centre? How can their learning be supported while keeping them safe?
Do children have access to the internet when at the playgroup? If so:
Do children have access to the internet when at the service? How can their learning be supported while keeping them safe?
Do initial quality checks
Do not count public holidays, even if the service will be open. Public holidays are not funded in advance.
Do not use public pool for 2 weeks after symptoms have stopped.
Do our experiences reflect and celebrate the rich cultures of our service every day?
Do our policies support us to share information in a safe way?
Do the equipment and facilities reflect the culture and purpose of the playgroup?
Do we code it as a form of distance learning?
Do we expect all parents and caregivers to stay all the time?
Do we know the history of and/or understand the protocols of our local
Do we know the history of and/or, understand the
Do we know the history of and/or, understand the tikanga of, our local
Do we need to do some things differently?
Do we notice who talks, when they talk, and what they say? Do we notice who does not talk, and why?
Do you have a cell phone to make an emergency call?
Do you have access to torches or emergency lighting?
Documentation (including copies of practising certificates) must be kept for 7 years.
Documentation can take a variety of forms, including some or all of the following:
Documentation is kept in relation to the identification of, and the planned response to, a need to seek additional specialist information and guidance.
Documentation may take a variety of forms to suit the service's operation (such as portfolios, wall displays, policies and procedures) but must include:
Documentation that provides evidence of the centre-based ECE service's compliance with criteria C1 to C13.
Documentation that provides evidence of the home-based ECE service's compliance with criteria C1 to C13.
Documentation that provides evidence of the hospital-based ECE service's compliance with criteria C1 to C13.
Documented playground safety checks
Documenting Person responsible observations
Documents are available in Adobe PDF format only. Accessible versions, where available, can be supplied on request.
Documents are available in PDF format only. If you have any issues accessing these documents, email us.
Documents you need to provide
Does it encourage children to play?
Does not meet requirement
Does the physical access support children to make choices about their movements between the indoor and outdoor environments, and provide access for children with different abilities?
Doing this every few months can help identify who is still part of the group. Your group may want to develop this as part of a roster system. For example, every second month you could check enrolment records against roll books. You may also want to phone parents and caregivers who are longer attending to enable you to maintain accurate records.
Donations are voluntary. Your early learning service can't require you to pay or describe them as fees.
Double glazing can be very effective in reducing outside noise experienced inside a building, but consideration will need to be given as to how noise will be mitigated if the doors and windows are open for access and ventilation.
Double glazing can be very effective in reducing outside noise, if this is a significant problem. However, it can be expensive to retrofit into existing windows, and alternative ventilation may be needed in place of opening windows.
Dough can also be used with natural materials or collage items for creative play.
Down the Back of the Chair
Down the Back of the Chair is our online catalogue of teaching and learning resources.
Download an example of one playgroup's roster and job descriptions below.
Download and complete the form.
Download the ECE funding handbook
Download the Emergency management plan template (see HS4 Emergency plan and supplies, above).
Download the attendance quick reference guide
Download the child protection policy.
Download the information sheet and read more about the prioritised settlement payment option.
Download the list of schools and
Download your completion certificate
Draft Cabinet paper - Improved teacher training
Draft Cabinet paper: strike notification - agreement for public consultation
Drafting of the second long-term insights briefing now underway
Drinking water for all children and adults
Drinking water for all children and adults.
Drinking water is always available for your child. Your centre may use cups or ask you to pack a refillable drink bottle.
Drivers cannot remove students from the bus for misbehaviour. They must finish the route so all students are taken to their destination.
Due diligence checks can include:
Due to maintenance, our Maungawhau office is currently only available for pre-booked appointments.
Due to privacy laws and difficulties verifying the identity of the person calling, the Ministry of Education is no longer able to provide payment totals in advance over the telephone or via email.
Dunedin Kindergarten Association
During a playgroup session it may be necessary to reset, or refresh play materials and equipment so that they are appealing to other children. If a child has created something purposefully then it may not be necessary to reset the resources, they have used rather just refresh the area without affecting the creation. This means children can revisit their creations at a later time.
During a school term, schools will close for:
During these meetings, the board must arrange for the school to remain open for instruction.
EC11 TKR: Application for change of quality/standard funding rate
EC12 Application for Exemption from Absence Rules for Special and/or Health Needs
EC13 Medical Certificate to Support Application for Exemption from Absence Rule for Special and/or Health Needs
EC15 Application to Receive Equity Funding for Providing Early Childhood Education in a Language and Culture other than English
ECE Operational Funding Mailbox
ECE Operational Funding must receive the completed RS2 form at least 2 weeks before your next payment is due to be made.
ECE Services may use electronic means of verification of attendance records to satisfy the requirements of this handbook.
ECE census (also known as the ECE return)
ECE census service information collected
ECE census staff information collected
ECE centres are required to clearly display the following documents so that they are easily available to be read by anyone at the centre. These could be displayed in an entryway or on a notice board so they are clearly visible and can be read by parents/
ECE centres must have an approved evacuation scheme before the Ministry of Education can grant a probationary licence. Up to 30 working days should be allowed for a scheme to be approved as the Fire and Emergency New Zealand has 20 working days to make a decision on an application, unless they determine that more information is needed, or that they need to observe a trial evacuation. In each of those cases the Fire and Emergency New Zealand has an additional 10 working days to make a decision.
ECE centres need to ensure they have good supplies of linen to cover any potential shortages.
ECE centres need to have an approved fire evacuation scheme for the premises in which they operate. Fire and Emergency New Zealand provide information about the process of applying for an approved scheme and maintaining the scheme once it is in place. The application can be done online.
ECE centres should consider having a long-term maintenance plan that includes a budget for replacement of worn-out flooring and/or surface protection.
ECE centres should employ "best practices" and have procedures in place that focus on health and safety, such as
ECE centres will need to ensure that children and adults who handle animals practice thorough handwashing procedures afterwards.
ECE funding handbook: 11-1 Record keeping requirements
ECE funding handbook: 3-B-2 Education and care services
ECE funding subsidy and 20 hours ECE rates
ECE service completes an RS7 Return with:
ECE services also receive a wash-up payment. The wash-up payment makes up the difference between the advance payment made in the previous funding payment and the actual funding entitlement.
ECE services are required to clearly display the required documents so that they are easily available to be read by anyone using the activity room.
ECE services must take steps to minimise the contact of children with any person who has an infectious illness.
ECE services on notional rolls must submit paper-based RS7 Returns
ECE services operating from hospital premises that provide education and care to siblings of patients or children of hospital staff or patients are centre-based ECE services, not hospital-based ECE services.
ECE services receive an advance for 4 months. Information on initial funding for new services can be found in Section 7-1 of this Handbook. The following section explains how the advance payment is calculated.
ECE services that support Teen Parent Units.
ECE services using a notional roll will need to submit their actual attendance data with their RS7 Returns (e.g. attendance data could be exported or printed from a Student Management System).
ELI exemptions will be given to services where the nature of their operations does not suit the regular collection of enrolment or attendance data.
ENROL privacy information
ENZ works to build awareness of New Zealand as a study destination and to pave the way for exporting education institutions and businesses.
ERO also publishes national reports on current education topics.
ERO has also prepared a set of evaluation indicators for use in its reviews of early childhood services. Services may also choose to use the indicators when reviewing their own performance. These indicators can be found at the Education Review Office.
ERO has more information about homeschooling education reviews.
ESL: Support for Online Delegated Authorisers - Ministry of Education
Each Playcentre is required to send a copy of their audited financial statement of Receipts and Payments to the Ministry.
Each actual funded child hour is multiplied by the relevant funding rate.
Each board then receives $1,000 each year to help with costs relating to maintaining their Community of Learning.
Each educator must belong to a home-based service, which provides support through a Person Responsible who is a fully qualified early learning teacher. Educators must hold a home-based service qualification or within 6 months of joining a home-based service, be enrolled in a course offering a home-based service qualification.
Each licensed service provider to whom this regulation applies must comply with the curriculum standard: general.
Each licensed service provider to whom this regulation applies must comply with the governance, management, and administration standard: general.
Each licensed service provider to whom this regulation applies must comply with the health and safety practices standard: general.
Each licensed service provider to whom this regulation applies must comply with the premises and facilities standard: general.
Each new user must have their own unique login. They should change the default password used to log in for the first time.
Each person responsible must be nominated for the role by their service provider. It is best practice for the service provider to give them enough information and support to help them understand their role and to carry out the duties expected of them.
Each person responsible must hold a current first aid qualification from a first aid training provider accredited by the New Zealand Qualifications Authority that meets the requirements of HS25.
Each place for a child for which a service is licensed.
Each playgroup should be equipped to provide a range of activities at each session.
Each playgroup will do things in ways that best suit the values, beliefs and interests of their own children, families, and the resources available in the setting and local community.
Each school decides how many places are likely to be available for students who live outside its home zone. Schools with roll pressure might not want to offer out-of-zone enrolments.
Each section of this chapter includes information on how specific service types can become eligible for higher funding rates.
Each service is licensed to provide early childhood education to a maximum number of children at any one time.
Each service may still claim up to 30 hours of funding per child per week, but funding must not be claimed for the same hours. The remaining hours once the 20 Hours ECE hours are used up may be claimed as Plus 10 ECE hours.
Each service will have its own daily routine, set around activities, meal times and nap times.
Each sibling or other relative must have their own enrolment record, signed by their parent/guardian.
Each time you receive the allowance, we will ask you to declare to us that you are still home educating. The allowance is not paid unless the declaration is completed.
Each type of early learning service has different criteria.
Each vehicle must be registered and have a current warrant of fitness, and how this will be checked.
Each vehicle must be registered and have a current warrant of fitness.
Each week, we release a list of the titles of briefings and reports that the Minister received from the Ministry.
Each year the Ministry is allocated funding by the Government to progress significant initiatives across the education system. The Budget 2024 initiatives below are important to the public and Parliament.
Each year we offer scholarships for people of Pacific descent to undertake tertiary study.
Each year, Education Workforce, part of the Ministry of Education, offers scholarships to encourage people to train as teachers in the areas where there is greatest need.
Each year, early learning services are required to report to parents on how they have spent Targeted Funding and why management chose to use the funding in this way.
Each year, early learning services that received $2,000 or more in Targeted Funding must report to the Ministry on their use of Targeted Funding and how the funding benefited
Each year, services must report to the Ministry on their use of Targeted Funding and how the funding benefited
Each year, the Ministry will calculate the Targeted Funding entitlement of all eligible early learning services. Any change in funding entitlement will be effective from the start of the next funding period on 1 March.
Earlier this year, we released a timeline for the key curriculum, assessment, and aromatawai changes happening between now and 2029, and the supports available.
Early Childhood Education (ECE) services must be licensed under the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008 in order to access government funding.
Early Childhood Education Food Programme
Early Childhood New Zealand and Safeguarding Children, have developed a digital child protection resource specifically for the early learning sector. See the instructions below to access the resource.
Early Childhood New Zealand and Safeguarding Children, have developed a digital child protection resource specifically for the early learning sector. See the instructions below to access the resource:
Early Learning Information (ELI) data
Early Learning services that have an estimated 20% or above Targeted Hours as a proportion of total Funded Child Hours (FCH) are eligible for Targeted Funding.
Early childhood curriculum (
Early childhood education
Early childhood education (ECE) is from birth to school entry age. It is not compulsory.
Early childhood education (ECE) services must meet the conditions of their licence to be eligible for Ministry of Education funding.
Early childhood education is subsidised by the Government. Find out about the higher subsidy for children 3 years of age and older.
Early childhood education services are eligible for the ECE Funding Subsidy if they are both:
Early childhood education services are eligible to offer 20 Hours ECE if they:
Early childhood education services must keep enrolment records for all children who attend the service including children who attend the service on a casual basis or conditional basis.
Early childhood education.
Early childhood educators and
Early childhood services and private schools
Early childhood staff form
Early childhood statistics
Early learning centres, schools and tertiary institutions
Early learning in New Zealand does not look the same as primary school, where there are structured classes or lessons.
Early learning information (ELI)
Early learning information (ELI) system
Early learning regulations are part of the Education and Training Act 2020.
Early learning service providers must consider that information to assess whether the person would pose a risk to the safety of children if they were to work at your service.
Early learning service providers should support
Early learning service providers should support educators and coordinators to remain current in their understanding of learning and development, theories, and practices. Regular professional learning and development (formal and informal) should support educators and coordinators to develop their knowledge and practices.
Early learning services are required to check their equipment, premises and facilities every day for hazards to children.
Early learning services are sometimes referred to as a:
Early learning services can combine their Targeted Funding with other services receiving Targeted Funding.
Early learning services can set their own enrolment processes so make sure you understand any requirements they have, for example, enrolment fees or minimum weekly hours.
Early learning services collect, hold, and use personal information. Learn how it can be safely used and shared under the Privacy Act.
Early learning services have food safety and nutrition criteria to follow.
Early learning services have to keep a record of all medicine given to children attending the service. Records include:
Early learning services may have a waiting list because they are full. If the service you want your child to go to has waiting a list, ask how long it will take before your child can attend. This may impact your choice.
Early learning services must always have a certain number of adults for the number of children attending. This is called the adult-to-child ratio. The ratio varies depending on the age of the children in your care and the type of service you are.
Early learning services must always have a person who is responsible and a certain number of adults for the number of children attending. This is called the adult-to-child ratio.
Early learning services must have a written child protection policy that meets the Children's Act 2014's requirements.
Early learning services will also have areas suitable for washing sick or soiled children.
Eating for healthy babies and toddlers outlines how to prepare foods for newborns to 1-year olds.
Education (Domestic Tertiary Student and International Student Contract Dispute Resolution Scheme) Rules 2023.
Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008
Education (Pastoral Care of Tertiary and International Learners) Code of Practice 2021
Education (Physical Restraint) Rules 2024
Education (Registration of Early Childhood Services Teachers) Regulations 2004
Education Counts also has early learning statistics such as participation, finances, staffing and language use.
Education Counts has a map of the regions and information about each school.
Education Counts has contact details for centres and services in your area.
Education Counts has data and information about what early learning services already exist in your area, and a forecast of population growth. This can help you decide if there is demand for another service in your area.
Education New Zealand (ENZ) is the lead Government agency for the promotion of New Zealand education internationally.
Education New Zealand (ENZ).
Education Payroll (EdPay)
Education Report 1335508 Minister Stanford
Education Report 1336238 Minister Stanford
Education Report 1336770 Minister Stanford
Education Report Confirming priorities ITE/teaching profession
Education Report Current challenges and potential work programmes
Education Report: Final Cabinet paper Improved teacher training
Education Review Office (ERO)
Education Workforce (former TeachNZ)
Education agencies provide support and services to/for the education sector, and information about studying and teaching in New Zealand.
Education and Care and Hospital-based services who pay all employed certificated teachers at least the amount described in the Base Salary Scale will be eligible to receive the Base Funding Rates
Education and Care and Hospital-based services who pay all employed certificated teachers at least the amount described in the Full Parity Salary Scale will be eligible to receive the Full Parity Funding Rates.
Education and Care and Hospital-based services who pay all employed certificated teachers at least the amount described in the Parity Salary Scale will be eligible to receive the Parity Funding Rates.
Education and Care and Hospital-based services who pay all employed certificated teachers at least the amounts described in the Extended Parity Salary Scale will be eligible to receive the Extended Parity Funding Rates.
Education and Care services may record the hours worked by relievers who are Other Teachers as Certificated Teacher Hours for the purposes of the Staff Hour Count for 80 hours during the funding period.
Education and Care services, Hospital-based
Education and Training Act 2020
Education and Training Amendment Bill (No 2)
Education and Training Amendment Bills are used regularly to progress policy proposals across early learning, schooling and tertiary education in order to be efficient with House time.
Education and care services
Education and care services and hospital-based services that attest to paying all employed certificated teachers at least the amount specified in the Base Salary Scale described in Appendix 4 must hold verification of this attestation. This must include copies of signed employment contracts, letter of appointment and letter(s) confirming changes in salaries paid to certificated teachers, including certificated relievers.
Education and care services and hospital-based services will confirm what minimum salary criteria they have met when completing their RS7 return.
Education and care services and newly establishing education and care services that meet the description of 1 of the new service types can change to that service type. Services self-attest to meeting the minimum language requirements.
Education and care services are required to keep a Staff Hour Count that will keep track of the number of Certificated Teacher Hours and Other Teacher Hours that make up the regulated (ratio) staff hours for their service.
Education and care services must keep a Staff Record to manage their Staff Hour Count. The Staff Record shows the actual hours worked by regulated (ratio) staff on a daily basis.
Education and care services or hospital-based services who are found to have not met their attestation obligation for Extended Parity Salary Scale described in Appendix 4 may have their funding adjusted.
Education and care services or hospital-based services who are found to have not met their attestation obligation for Step 1 to 6 of the salary scale described in Appendix 4 may have their funding adjusted to the applicable base funding rate.
Education and care services or hospital-based services who are found to have not met their attestation obligation for the Full Parity Salary Scale described in Appendix 4 may have their funding adjusted.
Education and care services that meet the required immersion or bilingual levels outlined in the next sub section will be required to attest:
Education articles to inform and inspire, plus job vacancies, notices and professional development opportunities.
Education articles to inform and inspire, plus job vacancies, notices, and professional development opportunities.
Education articles to inform, inspire, plus job vacancies, notices and PLD opportunities.
Education articles to inform, inspire, plus job vacancies, notices and PLD.
Education in New Zealand is a student-centred pathway providing continuous learning progression and choice so that:
Education officer in Government and non-Government organisations.
Education providers do not pay the EEL for:
Education providers who enrol international fee-paying students must pay the Export Education Levy (EEL). It is a percentage of their tuition revenue.
Education provision responds to learners within the context of their
Education snapshot by region
Education workforce payroll
Educator qualification requirements
Educators actively listen to and respond to all forms of communication from children.
Educators and coordinators are mindful of all learners when planning social, sensory, and physical environments. They are intentional and deliberate when selecting resources, teaching strategies, and learning experiences based on knowledge of the child and the local context.
Educators and coordinators require guidelines and opportunities for training to further develop their knowledge and understanding of:
Educators and coordinators should be organised with groups of children in ways that support secure and consistent care, language learning pathways, and positive transitions for children and
Educators and coordinators should enable
Educators and coordinators should purposely and intentionally respond to the strengths, interests, abilities, and needs of each child, and at times seek additional support from outside agencies in relation to learning, behaviour, development, or communication.
Educators and coordinators should share with, and support, parents and
Educators and coordinators support
Educators are familiar with relevant emergency drills and carry out each type of drill with all children present in the home (as appropriate) on an, at least, 3-monthly basis.
Educators are required to keep a record of each emergency drill. At a minimum, this should record:
Educators consult with parents about the process to be used when sharing information and making decisions to ensure it is culturally appropriate, comfortable, and effective for all.
Educators could hold workshops for parents/caregivers to share the learning experiences of their children.
Educators could provide documents for parents to read.
Educators critically reflect on practice in the light of new information they have learnt
Educators demonstrate in practice that they regard each child as competent and assist children to make choices by giving them the information they need to make informed decisions.
Educators develop, in collaboration with parents/
Educators effectively supervise children by actively watching and attending to their environment. They should avoid carrying out activities that will draw their attention away from supervision.
Educators emphasise what to do, rather than what not to do, in explanations and instructions.
Educators have a directory of specialist services and a ready network who will provide guidance and support to parents.
Educators have an important role and responsibility in fostering, role modelling, and supporting the peer-to-peer interactions of
Educators know and quickly recognise the factors that suggest that additional specialist information and guidance is required.
Educators listen carefully to children, asking open and searching questions to encourage complex learning and thinking.
Educators must never smoke or vape in the home while children are attending the service at any time including while children are asleep. In addition, they must never smoke or vape whilst on an excursion with the children.
Educators must notify parents as soon as possible of the event and be able to provide as much detail as possible about what happened, when, and what actions they took. Educators must also notify their coordinator or the service provider.
Educators must think about the possible emergency situations they might encounter in the home. Preparing for an emergency situation is an important part of the induction process that the coordinator carries out with each educator.
Educators need to consider the time, place, and space to develop these relationships through informal and formal opportunities. Formal opportunities will include times where communication is planned, and may involve preparation, for example, a parent interview when the child is admitted to hospital. Informal opportunities are likely to occur each day during the daily routines.
Educators need to continually scan the environment, so they know where the children are. Counting the children frequently is especially important if there is a larger number or age range of children attending.
Educators need to ensure that there is no access to any inappropriate material when completing their daily hazard check (HS11).
Educators need to feel confident and capable of providing the necessary support to children when they administer medication.
Educators promote stories, songs, dance, and music from a variety of cultures.
Educators share their knowledge with parents/
Educators share their understandings at staff meetings
Educators should be able to talk confidently and knowledgeably about the procedures without needing to refer to any documentation:
Educators should be aware of safe searching techniques and provide information to children on how to react and deal with unsolicited, inappropriate material.
Educators should draw on knowledge gained from the child and their parents and
Educators should ensure there are always clear paths to where children are playing, sleeping and eating so they can react quickly if needed. This is particularly important when children are attempting an activity for the first time or engaged in a high-risk activity. For example, if a child is using play equipment such as climbing apparatus, the educator should be close enough to ensure equipment is being used correctly and to reach the child if they slip or fall.
Educators should have emergency supplies on hand in the home. If providing out-of-school care:
Educators should set up the environment so that they can supervise the children at all times. When activities for different children are grouped together and furniture is at waist height or shorter, educators are always able to see and hear children. Small spaces should be kept clear of clutter and larger spaces are set up so children have clear play spaces that educators can observe.
Educators use a range of conversations skills to encourage children to talk and think about relationships and the consequences of different responses to a given situation or problem.
Educators use a variety of teaching strategies that demonstrate the holistic way children learn and grow.
Educators use daily care routines as opportunities to have meaningful interactions with children.
Educators use teaching strategies which reflect
Educators who are already working in your home-based early learning service on or before January 2025 should:
Educators who are joining your licensed home-based early learning service should:
Educators will need to ensure that animals including those brought to the home can be properly restrained at all times. This could include some guidance on:
Educators will need to ensure there is a good supply of linen on hand to cover any potential shortage.
Effective date for the change
Efficient heating will ensure rooms can be kept at a comfortable temperature while children are attending. See HS21 Room temperature.
Either a situation in a parent or
Either the child has been identified as having an ongoing learning support need, and this is supported by:
Electric fencing is unsuitable as a barrier.
Electronical attendance records criteria
Elevated beds are those where the upper surface of the mattress is 700mm or more above the floor.
Eligibility criteria for school transport assistance
Eligibility for Component A is based on the Equity Index (EQI). This index measures the extent to which a service draws children from low socio-economic communities.
Eligibility for Targeted Funding - 13-2
Eligibility for our process
Eligibility for transport assistance
Eligibility is determined through an attestation process.
Eligibility is not based on individual children. Your service may have children with low to moderate learning support needs in attendance, but not be eligible for funding against this component.
Eligible early learning services will receive Targeted Funding in 3 instalments each year alongside the ECE operational funding payments (i.e. March, July and November).
Eligible education and care services
Eligible services RS7 return
Eligible services are services that hold a licence under the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008.
Eligible services must complete the RS7 return for the ECE Subsidy funding round preceding an application being submitted for the allowance.
Eligible services will receive funding along with the payment of the ECE Funding Subsidy and 20 Hours ECE (i.e. March, July and November of each year).
Email any questions about our 2023 briefing to the Employment, Education and Training Secretariat
Email your application form to the resourcing team.
Emergency drill procedure briefing for all relieving staff and volunteers.
Emergency drill procedure briefings for all relieving staff.
Emergency management plan template
Emergency planning checklist
Emergency response coordinator contacts
Emergency response coordinators (ERC) will work with the school and the Ministry to coordinate the response effort with the relevant emergency services (Fire Emergency New Zealand (FENZ) or Police).
Emergency response coordinators are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week to respond to property-related damage as the result of a disaster such as fire, flood and extreme weather.
Employers will be able to confirm whether a person holds a Core Worker Exemption.
Employment-related complaints
Empowering students, connecting parents, and inspiring teachers. Our schools are vibrant hubs of learning, growth, and community.
Enable and use 2-factor authentication.
Enable every teacher, leader and educational professional to take coordinated action to become culturally competent with diverse Pacific learners.
Enable fail2ban, disable password logins (in favour of SSH keys), and turn off root login from SSH.
End of information: Action Plan for Pacific Education 2020-2030
Endorsement of achievement challenges
Energy survey for schools
Enforcement is when a service or educator withholds or withdraws enrolment, withholds or withdraws parts of their service (for example children not permitted to take part in certain activities) or attempts debt recovery.
Enforcement is when a service withholds or withdraws enrolment, or withholds or withdraws parts of their service (for example children not permitted to take part in certain activities), or makes debt recovery.
Engagement for school network change
Engaging on moving towards a more inclusive education system
English is accepted as a temporary language of instruction and communication.
Enquiries regarding the bulk funding payment
Enriching learning environments - To provide rich learning opportunities that support the development of
Enrolling and starting your child
Enrolling and starting your child in early learning
Enrolling at a school you are not in zone for
Enrolling inbound and outbound students
Enrolment agreement template
Enrolment agreements are used by the Ministry to verify the days/sessions that each child is enrolled for and expected to attend.
Enrolment and attendance records are maintained for children attending.
Enrolment details and records must be kept up-to-date. Parents must notify services and change the enrolment details if there is a change to the number of hours of 20 Hours ECE their child receives at any service.
Enrolment forms need to be checked by parents at least annually to ensure all enrolment details are up to date. Often service providers photocopy enrolment forms for educators to store at the home.
Enrolment information collected
Enrolment records are maintained for each child attending. Records are kept for at least 7 years.
Enrolment records for casual children must also include:
Enrolment records for children claiming 20 Hours ECE
Enrolment records for children receiving 20 Hours ECE must also include:
Enrolment records for conditional children must also include:
Enrolment records for each child currently attending and for those who have attended in the previous 7 years.
Enrolment records for each child currently attending and for those who have attended in the previous 7 years. Records meet the requirements of the ECE funding handbook and include at least:
Enrolment records must be kept for 7 years.
Enrolment records provide evidence that services and parents/guardians agree on the age of each child, and the number of hours for which each child is enrolled.
Enrolment records, showing at least:
Enrolment scheme for Te Kura Rau Iti and proposed amendment to Te Uho o Te Nikau.
Enrolment scheme guidelines
Enrolment scheme home zones are set by us in consultation with the school and community and managed by the school board.
Enrolment schemes are a way we make sure schools don't get overcrowded and local
Enrolment schemes are used in New Zealand schools to manage roll growth and provide priority access to students who live within a defined geographical area, known as the school zone.
Enrolment schemes at state schools set out a geographical area around the school called a home zone. The scheme also outlines any special programmes that a school might run. If you live within a school's home zone, your child automatically qualifies to enrol.
Enrolment schemes help manage overcrowding in schools. Learn how school boards operate schemes and how out-of-zone enrolment ballots work.
Enrolment, attendance, and absence records collected by the Ministry may be used to enable the Secretary for Education or the Minister of Education to exercise their powers or carry out their responsibilities under the Education and Training Act 2020, and as permitted by Privacy Principles 10 and 11.
Enrolments for children who will not be attending a service on a regular, ongoing basis.
Ensure that at least one person takes the role of person responsible and holds a recognised qualification, and
Ensuring children are properly restrained according to traffic law while travelling in a car is a bare minimum requirement.
Ensuring children do not have unsupervised access to hazardous equipment such as ropes, cords and tools is a key aspect of supervision. Access to any hazardous equipment must be closely monitored.
Ensuring that certificated teachers are fairly recognised and rewarded for their qualifications and experience in alignment with certificated teachers in kindergarten. This will, among other things, assist with increasing the number of certificated teachers working in early childhood education.
Enter bank account details on the RS2 form.
Enter the date of the first day of operation. This is the date on which your funding will begin.
Enter the name and contact details of your ECE service.
Entry (E) salary step for that qualification group.
Entry and maximum salary steps
Environment. For example, lacking in family and community support, having poor or negative role models, or being exposed to physical or psychological harm. Being involved with agencies such as Police,
Equally it is important to have a shared understanding of what will happen if the educator is sick or becomes ill whilst looking after children in the home.
Equipment at the centre will need to engage and challenge children and be flexible enough for children to construct their own learning. Flexible, moveable equipment allows children choice and control over how their learning environment is set up. Moveable equipment also encourages cooperation between children and provides opportunities for problem solving.
Equipment can be used in a variety of different ways.
Equipment from other areas can also be used with water for example, dolls and dolls clothes for washing, brushes for painting with water, tea set for washing.
Equipment should be safe and suitable for its purpose and the age of children using it.
Equipment used by the service will need to engage and challenge children and be flexible enough for children to construct their own learning.
Equipment, premises and facilities are checked on every day of operation for hazards to children. Accident/incident records are analysed to identify hazards and appropriate action is taken. Hazards to the safety of children are eliminated, isolated or minimised.
Equipment, premises and facilities are checked on every day of operation for hazards to children. Accident/incident records are analysed to identify hazards and appropriate action is taken. Hazards to the safety of children are eliminated, isolated or minimized.
Equipment, premises and facilities are checked on every day of operation for hazards to children. Hazards to the safety of the children are eliminated, isolated or minimised.
Equity Funding Component A: Low Socio Economic (per funded child hour)
Equity Funding Component B: Special Needs Funding (per funded child hour)
Equity Funding Component C: Language (monthly)
Equity Funding Component D: Isolation (monthly)
Equity Funding Rates (including GST)
Equity Funding is a targeted funding mechanism for all licensed ECE services. Equity Funding is paid to eligible services in addition to the ECE Funding Subsidy and 20 Hours ECE.
Equity Funding is available to all licensed ECE services that meet certain criteria.
Equity Funding is paid three times a year, along with the ECE Funding Subsidy.
Equity Funding must be spent with the equity objectives for participation and quality in mind. Guidelines for expenditure of each component are listed in the relevant section of this chapter.
Equity Funding provides additional educational resources to targeted communities to help improve access to early childhood education.
Equity funding consists of 4 components. Services may be eligible for funding against 1 or more (or all) components. Each component is described in detail in this chapter, but the following provides a summary.
Equity funding for early learning services
Equity funding is a targeted funding mechanism for all licensed early childhood education (ECE) services.
Equity funding is paid to eligible services in addition to the ECE Funding Subsidy and 20 Hours ECE.
Equity funding is targeted funding to improve access to, and participation in quality early childhood education. Equity funding is available to licensed, early childhood services that meet specific eligibility criteria.
Equity funding: Chapter 10
Equivalent qualifications
Erin attends 8 hours per day, Monday to Friday.
Erin is 1-year-old and is enrolled for four hours on Monday to Friday, from 1pm to 5pm.
Establish expectations with children about what is an acceptable level of noise inside. Early childhood education and care centres with high numbers of enrolled children may wish to have a noise level monitoring device.
Establishing a certificated playgroup
Establishing a new home-based service
Estimate how many children you think will permanently enrol in your service.
Estimating 20 hours ECE funding
Estimating the proportion of certificated teacher hours: 7-3
Estimating your ECE funding subsidy
Evacuation procedure briefing for all parents.
Every day in early learning is different. It depends on the type of early learning service your child is at, their age and their interests.
Every day in early learning is different. It depends on the type of service your child is at, their age and interests.
Every educator must ensure that they actively supervise children at all times when children are in attendance at the service. This must be implemented in accordance with the service's supervision plan.
Every employee must have a written employment agreement. It can be either an individual agreement or a collective agreement. Decide what form the draft employment agreement between staff and the service will take.
Every funded service must have a bank account into which ECE funding can be paid.
Every home will have at least one type of body wash facility available. Showers and shubs are preferred and are more hygienic as a child is not sitting in dirty water. However, if these are not available, fixed baths or baby baths are also suitable for washing sick or soiled children in the home.
Every permanent certificated
Every permanent certificated teacher employed by and teaching in a licensed Leo o Fanau Moana immersion and Leo o Fanau Moana bilingual service that receives PITA is eligible for this allowance.
Every philosophy statement will be different but could include:
Every school with a bus route funded by us must have a bus controller. This is usually a staff member at the school.
Every service that uses discretionary hours during the current funding period, must submit a record of the total number of discretionary hours used.
Every statement of philosophy will be different, but you might want to include:
Everyone involved at the service should have the opportunity to contribute to preparing and reviewing the statement, including:
Everyone understands their role in managing school property and is supported to deliver.
Evidence (such as a newsletter or enrolment pack information) of compliance with the criterion. A procedure people should follow if they wish to complain about non-compliance with the Regulations or criteria. The procedure includes the option to contact the regional Ministry of Education office and provides contact details.
Evidence of name change or use of an alternative name must be retained, where qualifications are in an alternative name (eg, maiden name).
Evidence of opportunities provided for parents and adults providing education and care to contribute to the development and review of the service's operational documents.
Evidence of parental permission for any travel by motor vehicle as part of the ECE programme.
Evidence of parental permission for any travel by motor vehicle.
Evidence of parental permission for any travel by motor vehicle. In most cases, this requirement will be met by the excursion records required for criterion HS17 (above). However, services that provide transport for children to and/or from the service must also gain written permission from a parent upon enrolment.
Evidence of parental permission for any travel by motor vehicle. In most cases, this requirement will be met by the excursion records required for criterion HS17. However, services that provide transport for children to and/or from the service must also gain written permission from a parent upon enrolment.
Evidence of parents having opportunities to contribute to the development and review of the service's operational documents could include:
Evidence of review of the plan on an, at least, annual basis and implementation of improved practices as required.
Evidence of review of the plan on, at least, an annual basis and implementation of improved practices as required.
Evidence of review of the plan on, at least, an annual basis.
Evidence that parents have had opportunities to contribute to the development and review of the service's operational documents could include the following:
Evidence-based best practices.
Exactly what type and quantity of furniture, equipment and materials provided will differ from centre to centre. Regardless of the type of equipment and materials provided, it is important there are sufficient quantities, so children do not have to wait long periods. This does not mean there has to be one of everything for each child at the centre, but children should be able to access equipment and materials that support their interests, skills and abilities.
Exactly what type and quantity of furniture, equipment, and materials provided in the activity room will differ between services.
Example 1 - Absence on a particular day
Example 1 - Enrolled 1 day per week
Example 2 - Enrolled 3 days a week
Example 2 - Fewer hours per day
Example 3 - Enrolled 5 days a week
Example 3 - Fewer days per week
Example hospital-based attendance record for enrolled children
Example of project and site constraints table
Example of the required attestation
Example of the use of Option 2:
Example staff record: Appendix 2
Example: Certificated and other teacher hours
Example: Regulated (ratio) staff
Examples of 'extended non-operation'
Examples of an injury or illness occurring as a result of a work activity include, but aren't limited to, a child:
Examples of funded child hours
Examples of personal information are the name of your school, a pet, or a family member. This information is easily found online.
Examples of potential changes:
Examples of special services that may be eligible for notional rolls are:
Examples of what this might look like in practice:
Excel spreadsheet version of financial statements
Except in emergencies, SESTA drivers are not allowed to touch any student. They also can't give medication to students in their care. If your child needs a teacher aide with them while they travel, this needs to be provided by the school.
Exchange programme organisations
Exchange programme organisations (EPOs) are independent groups approved by us to run secondary school exchange programmes in New Zealand.
Exchange programme organisations (EPOs) are independent organisations who operate secondary school student exchange programmes.
Exchange programme requirements
Exchange students must be aged 14 to 19 years, and enrolled in Years 9 to 15, or the overseas equivalent.
Exclude until 5 days after facial swelling develops, or until well
Exclude until blisters have dried. If blisters are able to be covered, and child feeling well, they will not need to be excluded.
Exclude until the day after appropriate treatment
Exclude until well and/or has received antibiotic treatment for at least 24 hours
Exclusion from school, early childhood centre or work
Exclusion from school, early childhood centre, or work
Excursion means being outside the licensed premises whilst receiving education and care from the service but does not include an outing for the purposes of:
Excursions that parents have agreed to prior to the excursion taking place, that are not a regular excursion.
Exemption from frequent absence rules
Exemptions from the frequent absence rule
Existing home-based services
Existing services can opt into 20 Hours ECE at any time but will only be advance funded for 20 Hours ECE on one of the major funding runs (1 March, 1 July, and 1 November).
Experiences and opportunities are taken for the modelling of non-discriminatory practices.
Explore becoming a teacher in New Zealand and career development opportunities within our education sector.
Explore becoming a teacher in New Zealand and delve into career development opportunities within our education sector.
Explore the updates to our implementation supports hub and the 5-year implementation timeline.
Exploring opportunities to design initiatives to grow the number of Pacific language teachers with Pacific communities.
Exposure to excess environmental noise in the outdoor space can be reduced by:
Exposure to objectionable material may occur inadvertently through normal and legitimate searching activities or by unsolicited email delivery.
Extended Parity (Partial Step 1 - 11 + Partial Management Step).
Extended Parity Funding Rates
Extended Parity Funding Rates are available to services who pay at least Steps 1 to 11 and the management salary step.
Extended Parity Funding Rates are available to services who pay at least the Partial Management Step of the Extended Parity Salary Scale.
Extended Parity Management Salary Scale
Extended Parity Salary Scale
Extended Parity Salary Scale (Partial Step 1 to 11 + Partial Management Step).
Extended Parity Salary Scale (Partial Step 1-11 + Partial Management Step)
Extended Parity Salary Scale (Partial Step 1-11 + Partial Management Step).
Extended parity funding rates are available to education and care services who agree to pay all employed certificated teachers according to Step 1 to 11 + Management Step of the Extended Parity Salary Scale.
Extended parity salary scale
Extended parity salary scale (Partial Step 1-11+ Partial management step)
Extended parity salary scale example: July funding period
Extending the School Strike Notification
Extension for periods of extended
Extra diligence is required by educators to ensure children are closely supervised during excursions. Advance planning of the destination, transport, meals and toilet breaks will help to identify potential hazards and to determine the level of supervision required. Children can be closely monitored by regular head counts throughout the excursion and by ensuring the educator remains in close proximity to the children.
Extraordinary roll growth funding
Extraordinary roll growth funding application
Extraordinary roll growth funding application primary schools
Extraordinary roll growth funding applications
Extraordinary roll growth funding applies to any schools where the number of students exceed real or projected roll growth. This is called the trigger point.
FCHs for children enrolled on a casual or conditional basis must be calculated based on attendance only.
Facebook (Ministry of Education NZ)
Facebook community standards
Facebook statement of rights and responsibilities
Failure to comply may in some cases affect your funding payments.
Failure to do so can result to the school or us taking legal action, including prosecution under Sections 243 and 244 of the Education and Training Act 2020.
Failure to make reasonable efforts to accommodate children with disabilities could be a breach of Part 2 of the Human Rights Act 1993.
Failure to meet these funding conditions may result in the funding being withheld either in full or in part.
Families are confident to talk with staff, ask questions, and offer information about their child.
Families are confident to visit, talk with staff, ask questions and offer information about their child.
Families are confident to visit, talk with staff, ask questions, and offer information about their child. What informal and formal opportunities for engaging with parents are regularly taken (and recorded) to develop an understanding of their aspirations for their child? In what way does our service use consultation to support change?
Families are responsible for getting their child to school. You can support families to apply for SESTA or make the application on their behalf.
Family Services Directory
Family day care coordinators in licensed home-based early childhood education services.
Family harm - who to report to
Family members as educators
February (payment on the first working day in March).
February/March: The school board prepares and approves the draft annual financial statements and the annual report.
Fees, donations, optional charges and home-based educator top up payments: 4-3
Fences under 1 metre that are made of climbable materials can be made unclimbable with the addition of shade cloth or use of additional barrier or fencing type materials, such as brushwood fencing or chicken wire.
Fever and spots with a blister on top of each spot
Fever, swollen neck glands and a rash on the face, scalp and body
Fill in the number of children (over 2 or under 2) that you have planned will be at the service every half hour (right hand column). Note that, at the start and end of the day, there are often fewer children attending. If this is the case, fewer adults may be needed at these times.
Finally, if you are populating the model for the first time save the file as Version 1. This will allow for easier version control.
Finally, in order to check the statement of financial position refer to check calculations on line 54 under columns H to J.
Finally, open the saved file and check the following.
Financial Reporting Act 2013 - New Zealand Legislation
Financial information required
Financial management for state-integrated schools
Financial reports required by the Ministry
Find a list of the Ministry staff you can discuss with about all your school's property needs.
Find an early learning centre or service
Find bulletins and news for the early learning education sector.
Find contact details for your Transport Delivery Advisors, and our school transport national team.
Find documents and links to pages that relate to the Bill.
Find guidance on human resource management for different types of service:
Find information on how to start early learning services or playgroups that need to be licenced or certified.
Find instructions for using the school bus route maps site in our guide.
Find more information about our tools and applications.
Find more information about record keeping and financial reporting requirements:
Find more information here:
Find more information on school responsibilities in the guide below.
Find opportunities to strengthen teaching practice and educational leadership to support
Find our annual reports, budgets, briefing for incoming ministers, and other corporate documents.
Find out about New Zealand's education system and the agencies that support it.
Find out about accessing extra support in early learning.
Find out about administration, fees and available support in tertiary education and training
Find out about being employed in early childcare centres, including employment agreements, pay, leave and personal development.
Find out about being employed in schools and kura, including employment agreements, pay equity, allowances and study awards.
Find out about best practice for managing software and devices in schools and kura, generative AI, and more.
Find out about buying goods and services for schools and kura.
Find out about buying services and supplies for schools, kura and early learning services.
Find out about careers at the Ministry of Education, and in the education sector.
Find out about changes in the education sector. Circulars cover topics including industrial relations, funding, schools and student support.
Find out about funding and reporting in early childhood education, including key dates and forms.
Find out about health and safety requirements when working with schools and kura.
Find out about how to get in touch with us.
Find out about how we collect, use, and share information gathered about individuals and organisations.
Find out about how your child's early learning service will keep them healthy and safe, manage risks and respond to any emergencies.
Find out about medium- and long-term trends, risks and opportunities in the education sector, including analysis and policy options.
Find out about our attendance and achievement priorities.
Find out about our people, our leadership, and our ministers.
Find out about requirements to run school exchanges as a private exchange programme organisation (EPO).
Find out about some of the help, provisions and financial support available to your child at school.
Find out about the 2025-2026 dates for cohort entry.
Find out about the Act which regulates our education system.
Find out about the action plan 2020-2030, including progress updates.
Find out about the acts and bills introducing and establishing change recently.
Find out about the advice and reports we provide to ministers.
Find out about the criteria you must meet when running any type of early learning service.
Find out about the criteria you must meet when starting early learning services of all types.
Find out about the learning support funds, schemes and services available to schools and kura, and guidance on accessing it.
Find out about the long-term direction for managing school property to support all schools having quality learning environments.
Find out about the process on how to get a Holidays Act remediation payment below.
Find out about the regulations supporting international students.
Find out about the resources, tools and assistance available if your child needs support with their learning.
Find out about the role we play in New Zealand's education system, and what we are here to do.
Find out about the rules and regulations of education in New Zealand, including what you need to do as a parent.
Find out about the strategies and policies guiding agencies to deliver good outcomes for early learning education in Aotearoa New Zealand.
Find out about the strategies and policies guiding agencies to support and deliver tertiary and further education for domestic and international students.
Find out about the study awards that students can qualify for.
Find out about the topics we have released packages of information about, where there is a high degree of public interest.
Find out about the types of help available if your child needs support with their learning or development.
Find out about what happens in early learning services and what your child's learning might look like.
Find out about what help you might get to pay for the cost of an early learning service.
Find out about what your child will learn at school and how you can be involved.
Find out about what your child will need at school and how to enrol them.
Find out about working on property projects in schools and kura.
Find out about your options for early learning, how to choose a service and the process for enrolment and getting started.
Find out about your young person's career and training options after school and how to choose a programme of study.
Find out how secondary school exchange programmes work in New Zealand.
Find out how to choose a device for your child.
Find out how to complete the energy survey for operational efficiency, and what the information is used for.
Find out how to make a request, and see our responses to requests under the Official Information Act.
Find out how to prepare and submit a school annual report.
Find out how to report accidents and incidents on school transport.
Find out how to support your child with positive mental health and wellbeing.
Find out how we calculate new entrant adjustments.
Find out more about child protection policies for each service type:
Find out more about higher and vocational education.
Find out more about some of our services and the information we collect.
Find out more about the health, safety and wellbeing measures and support in your child's school.
Find out more about the information we publish:
Find out more about what is defined as official information at:
Find out more information about transporting children to and from ECE services and
Find out more information on transporting children to and from ECE services and
Find out the loans, allowances and scholarships your young person might get to help pay for the cost of tertiary study.
Find out what Tessa learnt at playgroup.
Find out what boards and education professionals need to do to plan and maintain safe school property and facilities.
Find out what boards and education professionals need to do to plan and maintain safe school transport and facilities.
Find out what bullying is and how to get help and support for your child.
Find out what education professionals do to keep children healthy and safe in early learning services.
Find out what education professionals need to do to keep students healthy and safe in schools and kura.
Find out what support is available to children that have learning support needs, and how to access it.
Find out who you must contact if you suspect a child is at risk. We provide training to recognise and respond to abuse and neglect.
Find roles in the Ministry learning support area and other roles at the Ministry of Education.
Find the Ministry of Education websites you need with this helpful directory of our sites and their purposes.
Find the digital versions here:
Find the property advisors' contact details for the Central North region.
Find the property advisors' contact details for the Central Southern region.
Find the property advisors' contact details for the Northern region (Auckland and Te Tai Tokerau).
Find the property advisors' contact details for the Southern region.
Find what scholarships are available
Finding an exchange partner
Finding contact information for your Transport Delivery Advisor
Fire and Emergency NZ has no concerns about the use of the multi-level cot (HS4)
Fire and Emergency New Zealand
First advance of 20 hours ECE
First aid kit contents and placement
First aid kit identification
First aid kit maintenance
First aid kit. Consider carrying some bags in case of travel sickness, and some portable instant ice packs.
First aid kit. Consider carrying some bags in case of travel sickness, and some portable instant icepacks.
First aid kits must be stored in a container, so it is readily available to adults but is secure and out of reach of children. If the first aid kit, or cupboard or container in which it is stored, is locked, make sure the key is kept within easy reach of adults and all staff know where it is. A sign nearby letting any adult know where to find the key in an emergency is a good idea.
First aid kits must include at least the following:
First aid kits should include the following (or these items are available on the premises):
First aid kits should include the following:
First aid qualification condition clause (HS22)
First aid qualifications for early learning
First aid qualifications for early learning services and
First aid training delays for home-based educators
First aid training providers
First long-term insights briefing published in 2023 about preparing all young people for satisfying and rewarding working lives
Fitness for purpose, including
Fitzgerald Construction Limited
Fixed outdoor equipment should meet the requirements of current New Zealand Standards (contact Standards New Zealand for up-to-date information), have soft-fall surfacing installed beneath it and be checked and maintained regularly.
Fixed-term units are for the period allocated by the board (usually for a minimum of 1 term).
Flexible, moveable equipment allows children choice and control over how their learning environment is set up. Moveable equipment also encourages cooperation between children, and provides opportunities for problem solving.
Floor surfaces are durable, safe and suitable for the range of activities to be carried out (including wet and messy play) and can easily be kept clean.
Floor surfaces in any ECE activity room are durable, safe and suitable for the activities to be carried out at the service (including wet and messy play), and can easily be kept clean.
Floor surfaces should be easy to clean and suitable for the activities being undertaken.
Floor surfaces should be easy to clean and suitable for the activities being undertaken. Well maintained wooden, particle, cork, polished concrete, tiles or vinyl floors are most suitable in an area used for messy play, while carpet is better in a book or block area. Consider how much time children spend on the floor when choosing a floor type.
Follow the instructions below (and the examples in section 6-8) to apply the Frequent Absence Rule:
Follow the instructions outlined in the documents below.
Follow the steps below to calculate the 20 Hours ECE Funding:
Follow the steps below to calculate the FCHs for children aged under 2:
Follow the steps below to calculate the daily actual Certificated Teacher Hours for your service:
Follow the steps below to calculate the number of days that advance funding will be paid for:
Follow the steps below to estimate your children and hours for the ECE Funding Subsidy.
Follow these steps to complete the
Follow up with a formal complaint
Following a review, the notional roll may be adjusted, or the ECE service may be returned to normal funding if it no longer meets the criteria for a notional roll.
Following receipt of this payment services must pay the full allowance payment received to each certificated
Following the reintroduction of the 100% funding band on 1 January 2021 services will no longer be able to request additional payments from parents to help contribute the cost of having more than 80% certificated teachers.
Food allergies and intolerances
Food is prepared, served, and stored hygienically.
Food is served at appropriate times to meet the nutritional needs of children while they are attending
Food is served at appropriate times to meet the nutritional needs of each child while they are attending. Where food is provided by the service, it is of sufficient variety, quantity and quality to meet the nutritional and developmental needs of each child. Where food is provided by parents, the service encourages and promotes healthy eating guidelines.
Food preparation and eating spaces
Food preparation surfaces
Food safety at early learning services
Foods that pose a high choking risk to children must not be served unless prepared in accordance with the Ministry of Health guidance. This guidance outlines foods that should be excluded from services and how to alter other high-risk foods for different age groups, that is, for 1 to 3 years old, and 4 years up to 6 years.
For Ministry-funded services, transport assistance can be either:
For NCEA external assessments, the use of GenAI is not permitted. The New Zealand Qualifications Authority (NZQA) has more information.
For NCEA internal assessments, teachers must be aware of any specific requirements of the Achievement Standard being assessed and its Conditions of Assessment.
For Te Marautanga o Aotearoa
For The New Zealand Curriculum
For Waikato SESTA enquiries, email
For Year 1 to 8 students this is at least 3.2 kilometres from the school.
For Year 9 to 13 students this is at least 4.8 kilometres from the school.
For a 2-stage open tender, a recommendation report must be completed after stage 1. This recommends which suppliers should advance to stage 2 and be invited to make an offer.
For a 2-stage process, first use:
For a child with age, for example, autism, uh,
For a single-stage process, or the second stage of a 2-stage process, use:
For a single-stage tender, you only complete 1 recommendation report.
For a student attending a state-integrated school, it must be the closest school of its designated character as defined under Section 204 of the Education and Training Act 2020. For example, the closest Catholic school. Single-sex schools and intermediate schools do not meet this criterion as they do not have a designated character as defined under the Act.
For a successful audit the board should:
For accuracy and consistency, we use the mapping software ArcGIS to measure the distance over the shortest public road or pedestrian route from the home roadside gate to the school or kura front gate.
For all early learning enquiries and licensing applications (North and West), email:
For all other changes, including if a child no longer needs to use the service, you must tell us using the email address below.
For all other changes, including if the student no longer needs a conveyance allowance, you must tell us using the email address below.
For all other changes, including if your child no longer needs SESTA, you must tell us using the email address below.
For all other changes, including if your child no longer needs a conveyance allowance, you must tell us using the email address below.
For all other enquiries, check out the contact us page.
For all other support, contact your regional office.
For all professional services including project management
For all subsequent years, Targeted Funding is provided for the period 1 March to 28/29 February the following year.
For an EQI to be calculated, each service must provide certain details about the children enrolled in the service and their families. This information is collected at 2 points in the year. The Ministry will contact new services when the information is being collected.
For an organisation to grow and improve the quality of its services, it is important it monitors its performance.
For an update to this timeline, and for more information, including a list of changes, visit:
For any enquiries or to be added to the consultation mailing list, email
For any injury/incident that is notifiable under the Health and Safety at Work Act 2015 (HSWA), it is a requirement to keep the records for 5 years from the date of the incident.
For anything regarding this change and
For assistance with financial reporting, contact your School Finance Advisor.
For certificated teachers employed in split roles, only the hours they are employed engaging in duties and responsibilities in a teaching role should be counted as hours of work. Information on split roles can be found in 3-B-2 Education and care services.
For certificated teachers, any previous experience as an uncertificated teacher in Pacific immersion or bilingual environments should be credited as half-service up to a maximum of 2 years' experience. This experience could be paid or unpaid.
For children under 3 years, all equipment should meet the Product Safety Standards (Children's Toys) Regulations 2005.
For children who are 3, 4 and 5 years old, 20 hours per week is funded by the government. If your child is at an early learning centre for more than 20 hours, you may have to pay for the remaining hours.
For clarity, a simple summary notice about the complaints process could be displayed close to the licence. This summary notice would cover the key steps and people to contact and include details of the regional Ministry office.
For clarity, a simple summary notice about the complaints process could be displayed close to the licence. This summary notice would cover the key steps and people to contact, and include details of the regional Ministry office.
For clarity, the purpose for closing is determined by the board, so long as it meets the criteria for closing. These settings will be in place from Term 1 of 2025.
For common medicines administered by mouth (such as antibiotics), the level of information needed will be minimal.
For common medicines that are administered by mouth (such as antibiotics), the level of information needed will be minimal.
For each criterion there is guidance to help centres meet the required standards.
For each criterion there is guidance to help services meet the required standards.
For each criterion, there is guidance to help playgroups meet the required standards.
For each day of an average week in the advance period, services provide the number of funded child hours they would claim as:
For each day of the week deduct the 20 Hours ECE hours (step 2) from the Total Hours (step 3). This is the Plus 10 ECE hours you will claim.
For each day of the week estimate the number of 20 Hours ECE hours each child will claim. You must not claim more than 6 hours per day and 20 hours per week of 20 Hours ECE hours per child.
For each day of the week estimate the number of children receiving 20 Hours ECE that will be permanently enrolled in your service.
For each day of the week estimate the number of hours each child is permanently enrolled in your service. For each child use the lower of the enrolled hours or 6 hours per day up to a maximum of 30 hours per week.
For each day of the week estimate the number of under 2-year-old children that will be permanently enrolled in your service.
For each day of the week estimate the total number of Under 2 Funded Child Hours you will claim.
For each group, consider:
For each offer, verify that:
For each session, all playcentres must:
For employees without a school payroll administrator, email
For enquiries about traffic management, managing traffic flows around schools and developing a car parking policy, contact your local regional or district council.
For example, 1 additional step for every 2,080 hours (roughly one year) of additional recognised service.
For example, a handwashing basin may not be appropriate in a room that is going to be used by children who are nil by mouth (unless it is fitted with some way of ensuring children do not have independent access to the water). In this instance, the play specialist would need to be able to provide moistened individual flannels for children, and supervise handwashing to ensure the child does not try to suck them.
For example, a service that operates a Pacific immersion and bilingual room within a larger service is unlikely to be eligible for the 51-80% bilingual service type.
For example, a service that operates a te reo immersion or bilingual room within a larger service is unlikely to be eligible for the 51-80% bilingual service type.
For example, all records for the month of February (including temporary closures) must be confirmed as accurate and complete by 31 March.
For example, if a pattern of frequent absence first occurred in the month of December, this would be month 1. If a service did not operate in January for a period of 2 weeks or more and February was the next full month of operation, February would be month 2.
For example, if your service has 9 children aged under 2, and 21 children aged 2 or older, you could count 1 of the older children in the under-2s group. Then you only need 2 staff members for the 2-and-over group and not the 3 staff members 21 children would usually need.
For example, many kindergartens operate for a shorter day similar to school hours, but some offer full-day options.
For example, services where you stay with your child will cost less than services that are run by employed staff.
For example, the comparisons table, um,
For example: 68 hours and 30 minutes would be rounded to 69 hours whereas 68 hours and 29 minutes would be rounded to 68 hours.
For examples of the Frequent Absence Rule, please refer to Section 6-8.
For families and communities, you can use this section to work with services, schools and providers to grow and support Pacific language pathways in your community and to understand what actions the Ministry of Education and partner agencies are taking.
For fire drills: A building assessment, for example:
For fire evacuations: A building assessment, for example checking that all appropriate notices were displayed, escape routes were clear, firefighting equipment serviced and so on.
For funding purposes, teacher-led services include:
For funding purposes, the enrolment record for each child must include:
For funding to be delivered accurately and fairly, the following three records must be maintained: enrolment records, attendance records and absence records.
For further information on these funding types, see Chapters 5, 10 and 13 of this Handbook.
For information about advertising on GETS, use the guides below.
For information on advance funding please refer to Chapter 2 of this Handbook.
For information on formal training courses, go to the New Zealand Qualifications Authority website.
For information regarding what records your service needs to keep see Chapter 11 of this Handbook.
For intermediate year levels we compare the:
For material copyright to the Ministry of Education
For material with third-party copyright
For meetings attendance records and minutes of the meeting could be considered as evidence.
For minor injuries, staff will contact you or let you know at the end of the day. If a serious injury happens, staff will contact you straight away. All services will have documentation that must be completed, and you will be asked to sign the information.
For more help completing your RS3 Form, contact your Ministry regional office.
For more information about areas of play in a broad-based programme, refer to the following website.
For more information about making your space safe, visit the ACC website.
For more information about managing employment disputes, see the Labour Inspectorate website.
For more information about mixed provision contact Ministry regional office.
For more information about the audit process, watch the 'School Audit Process' video in the resources section below.
For more information contact your local public health service office.
For more information on any of these topics, contact your Ministry regional office.
For more information on appropriate visas to enter New Zealand, see the Immigration New Zealand website.
For more information on claiming advance funding see Section 9-5 Calculating Advance Days.
For more information on completing your RS7 Return, please see Chapter 9 of this Handbook.
For more information on filling child-places refer to Section 6-2 of this Handbook.
For more information on the ECE Subsidy see Chapter 3 of this Handbook.
For more information on the ECE Subsidy, see Chapter 3 of this Handbook.
For more information on the Regulations see:
For more information on the absence rules refer to Chapter 6 of this Handbook.
For more information on the adult:child ratios refer to the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008.
For more information on the preparation and storage of infant formula, refer to the guidance for HS20 Bottle feeding (below).
For more information on the quality rate, services should refer to Section 3-C-2.
For more information on when and how funding is paid, see Section 2-4.
For more information or guidance on enrolling your child into qualifications or tertiary programmes, contact your regional office.
For more information or support with conflicts of interest at your school, contact us.
For more information or to submit a request, email
For more information, contact your local public health service office.
For more information, contact your regional office.
For more information, see Learning support in the early years or contact the Learning Support Information Line
For most centres, the best option is paper towels. There is a cost involved, but they have several advantages:
For non-compliance with safety checking, we may either reclassify your licence as provisional or suspend your licence. If compliance is not achieved by the date we set, we may cancel your licence.
For older children, talk to your child's doctor or healthcare provider to access support.
For older, heavier children, a change mat on the floor may be more appropriate than a changing table.
For other help or advice, contact your regional office.
For other learning opportunities, you could look for groups and activities, such as sports clubs, within your own community and contact them.
For playcentres receiving quality funding, the record will indicate which quality funding rate option was being used for each session.
For playgroups, the educational programme is made up of all the things that are happening for children while they are attending playgroup. This will include:
For primary year levels we compare the:
For primary, intermediate and special schools, they are also covered in:
For procurements valued below $100,000, the procurement owner can be the same person as the procurement officer.
For regular excursions, the risk assessment can be a new plan or an update of a previous assessment, so any new risks are identified. The potential risks are more likely to be known to, and easily managed by, the service provider as part of their routine involvement and presence in the community.
For regular excursions, the risk assessment can be a new plan or an update of a previous assessment, so any new risks are identified. This should be made available for parents to sight at the time of enrolment.
For salary purposes, New Zealand qualifications that are registered on the New Zealand Qualifications Framework (NZQF) must be recognised.
For school payroll administrators, email
For schools and PPPM panel members, email
For schools and kura covering Years 0-8
For schools and kura covering Years 9-13
For secondary and composite schools, the requirement is 380 half days. For primary, intermediate and special schools it can vary between a minimum of 380 half days and a maximum of 390. This variable length is due to the shifting timing of Easter.
For secondary school year levels, we compare the:
For serious non-compliance with safety checking, we may consider referring to the Police for criminal investigation. This may lead to a criminal prosecution and a fine of up to $10,000 per person not safety checked.
For services applying for a first advance of 20 Hours ECE:
For services offering out-of-school care, the notice could be:
For simple procurements, this role could be done someone at the school such as a board member or caretaker.
For specific details see 3-C-3.
For students travelling from some islands to mainland New Zealand for secondary school or
For students who do not have an NSN, you can create an NSN for them. Sight and verify the student's official documentation before creating the NSN. We may request a copy of official documentation used to verify an NSN for data quality purposes.
For students who want to go to a special character school, the Access Barrier Allowance is available to the nearest school of that type, even if there are closer schools.
For support with your student management system (SMS), contact your provider.
For teachers, leaders and educators, you can use this section to plan for Pacific language pathways in your service, school, institute and community and to understand what actions the Ministry of Education and partner agencies are taking.
For teaching qualifications where the specialisation is not identified on the certificate itself (that is, it does not state an early childhood or primary specialty), academic transcripts or similar to show the course content must be kept as evidence that the qualification meets the requirements for home-based education.
For the Ministry of Education and partner agencies, this section sets out our commitment to grow Pacific language pathways by taking specific actions.
For the avoidance of doubt, nothing in the paragraphs above prevent the Ministry from decreasing the amount of the grant paid in advance to a service where the Ministry has reasonable grounds to believe that the matters set out in paragraphs d), g), h), i) or j) above may apply.
For the first day of the funding period, use your Staff Record to total the actual hours worked by ECE qualified certificated and New Zealand qualified certificated primary teachers who were being counted towards regulated (ratio) staff.
For the indoor and outdoor space requirements, see the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008.
For the purpose of the PITA an employed certificated teacher years of experience must be counted as:
For the purposes of the ECE Funding Subsidy, licensed ECE services are grouped into two types:
For the purposes of the Staff Hour Count the Staff Record must contain all of the following:
For the qualification groups please see 3-B-2.
For this reason, it is important that the visits are scheduled for each child during their normal days and hours of enrolment, while under the care of their regular educator, and when the child is awake and engaged in the activities being provided by the educator.
Form of agreement for engagement of consultant template
Formalise the employment agreement between staff and the service prior to employment.
Formica squares, sheets of plastic or tabletops for finger painting.
Free education at state schools
Free phone (NZ only): 0800 BUS2SCHOOL or
Freedom of expression in universities
Freephone (NZ only): 0800 422 599
Freephone (NZ only): 0800 782 435
Freephone (NZ only): 0800 TALK TEETH (
Frequently asked questions
Frequently asked questions about GenAI in NCEA assessment
Frequently asked questions for UIPs
Frequently asked questions: Playgroups Regulation 19
Friday 1 August 2025: Change of technology for 2026 application deadline.
Friday 12 September 2025: Provisional rolls published.
Friday 14 November 2025: Provisional roll review applications deadline.
Friday 21 November 2025: Extraordinary roll growth applications deadline.
Friday 28 November 2025: All staffing applications and funding code changes for 2025 school year deadline.
Friday 3 April to Sunday 19 April 2026.
Friday 5 December 2025: Quarter 1 operational funding 2026 instalment published.
Friday 6 June 2025: June roll return due.
Friday 7 March 2025: March roll return due.
From 1 January 2023, the new strategic planning and reporting framework was introduced, and the National Education Goals and National Administration Guidelines were removed. The then new planning and reporting framework has a clear link to the NELP and will require schools and
From 1 January 2025 there will be one funding rate for home-based ECE services, this will be the quality funding rate.
From 1 January 2025, the qualification requirements for educators in every licensed home-based education and care service have been updated, and are set out in the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008, regulation 3 and Schedule 1A.
From 1 January 2026, home-based educators without a current first aid certificate must complete a certificate with unit standards 6401 and 6402 to meet licensing requirements.
From 1 May 2025, schools and kura are required to use the new school planning and reporting application to submit their 2024 annual reports to us. These need to be submitted by 31 May 2025.
From 1 October 2024, the term all employed, in relation to the Minimum Salary Scale for Certificated Teachers, means all certificated teachers who are permanently employed either on a part-time or full-time basis to work in a teaching or management role in the service (i.e., they are working for hire or reward under a contract of service).
From 7am-8:30am, there are usually only a few children present. This means only 1 person is required to meet the regulated (ratio) staff requirements.
From January 2025, there will be a report on the following for each of these 2 initiatives:
From Term 1 2025, your school or kura must record student attendance data in your SMS every day you are open for instruction. This is a requirement of the Education and Training Act 2020, and the Education (School Attendance) Regulations 2024.
Full Final Cabinet Paper on Scope and Terms of Reference
Full Parity (Full Step 1-11 + Full Management Steps).
Full Parity Funding Rates
Full Parity Funding Rates are available to services who pay at least Full Parity Salary Scale (Full Step 1-11 + Full Management Steps).
Full Parity Funding Rates are available to services who pay at least the Full Management Steps of the Full Parity Salary Scale.
Full Parity Salary Scale (Full Step 1-11 + Full Management Steps)
Full Parity Salary Scale (Full Step 1-11 + Full Management Steps).
Full Parity funding rates are available to education and care services who agree to pay all employed certificated teachers according to Steps 1 to 11 + Management steps of the Full Parity Salary Scale.
Full parity salary scale (Full Step 1-11+ Full management steps)
Full parity salary scale example: July funding period
Full records of both regular and special excursions should be kept for the current year plus 1 additional year.
Full step 1 - 11 + Full management steps: Full parity funding rates. Band determined by the service's certificated ratio.
Full-time teaching equivalent (FTTE)-based entitlement staffing
Funded child hours (FCHs) are the hours for which a service may claim funding and are based on:
Funding (certificated teachers)
Funding Band determined by the proportion of Certificated Teacher Hours
Funding and Equity Funding payments are eligible to receive the ATIS.
Funding and attestation adjustments
Funding and staffing adjustment
Funding and teacher certification lapses
Funding band determined by the proportion of certificated teacher hours
Funding band determined by the proportion of certificated teacher hours.
Funding can be claimed only for children who fill a child-place and are less than 6 years of age.
Funding can only be claimed if the service is open on the day the public holiday is observed.
Funding can only be claimed to a maximum of 6 hours per child-place per day, up to 30 hours per child-place per week.
Funding cannot be claimed for:
Funding claim audits of home-based care networks will take place in the area in which the network operates.
Funding conditions: Chapter 3-A-2
Funding eligibility: Chapter 3-A-1
Funding for absences in the fourth month
Funding for an enrolled child begins on the planned start date of their enrolment agreement.
Funding for casual and conditional children
Funding for casual and conditional children is based on attendance only.
Funding for casual children is based on attendance only.
Funding for make-up days: 6-9
Funding for new ownership
Funding for new services: 7-1
Funding information for playgroups.
Funding is a fixed monthly grant. It is not related to the size of the service, nor the number of funded child hours claimed.
Funding is a fixed monthly grant. There are currently 3 payment bands, which reflect different levels of isolation. This means that more isolated services receive a higher rate of funding.
Funding is not based on the size of a service, nor the number of funded child hours claimed.
Funding is paid 3 times a year, on the first working day of the following months.
Funding is targeted to services with a limited capacity to generate Funded Child Hours due to isolation.
Funding may be claimed for
Funding may be withheld in part or in full
Funding may be withheld in part or in full if the Ministry does not receive information from your service within 8 weeks
Funding may continue at the standard rate for playcentres who do not have a person responsible, provided the breach of qualification requirements is being managed through a provisional licence process. This is a temporary measure (generally for up to 3 months) and will only be considered where there is a clear action plan in place to fill the person responsible role.
Funding may not be claimed for
Funding must not be claimed for both the absence and the make-up day when the child is only fulfilling their enrolment expectation.
Funding must not be claimed for:
Funding on the basis of average actual attendance over a specified period.
Funding on the basis of enrolment ends:
Funding payments to the new owners will not be made until the change of service provider has been verified by a Ministry regional office.
Funding payments will continue once complete and accurate ECE Census data is submitted.
Funding payments will continue once:
Funding payments will not be made to the new bank account until the RS2 form has been received by ECE Operational Funding.
Funding rate changes for quality rate funding are effective from the date the
Funding rate outcome from attestation response
Funding rates and payment
Funding rates depend on the age of children attending the service. This is measured by completion of the funded child hour entitlement section of the RS7 Return.
Funding rates depend on whether the service is offering 20 Hours ECE to eligible children. This is measured by completion of the 20 Hours ECE Hour entitlement section of the RS7 Return.
Funding rates for teacher-led ECE services depend on five variables.
Funding resumes when the child returns to the service.
Funding that must be used to cover particular expenses or to meet particular objectives e.g. equity funding.
Funding will continue where a home-based service or individual home-based educator was forced to close for a short time, in an emergency only when funding approval for the emergency closure is obtained from the Ministry regional office.
Funding will continue where a service was forced to close for a short time, in an emergency only when funding approval for the emergency closure is obtained from the Ministry regional office.
Furniture and items intended for children to sleep on (such as cots, beds, stretchers or mattresses) are of a size that allows children using them to lie flat, and are of a design to ensure their safety.
Furniture and items intended for children to sleep on (such as cots, beds, stretchers or mattresses) must:
Furniture and items intended for children to sleep on (such as cots, beds, stretchers or mattresses) that will be used by more than one child over time are securely covered with or made of a non-porous material (that is, a material that does not allow liquid to pass through it) that:
Furniture or equipment can be set up indoors to make small challenge courses for children.
Furniture or items intended for children to sleep on (such as cots, beds, stretchers or mattresses) are available for the sleep or rest of children aged 2 and older.
Furniture or items intended for children to sleep on (such as cots, beds, stretchers or mattresses) are provided at a ratio of at least 1 to every 2 children under the age of 2.
Furniture or items intended for children to sleep on (such as cots, beds, stretchers or mattresses) are provided at a ratio of at least 1 to every 5 children under the age of 2.
Furniture or items intended for children to sleep on (such as cots, beds, stretchers, or mattresses) are arranged and spaced when in use so that:
Furniture such as cots, beds, stretchers or mattresses and bedding that is used periodically needs to be hygienically stored when not in use to prevent cross-infection. Spraying and wiping cots, beds and mattresses with a suitable cleaning agent is needed before storage. Linen must be removed from the mattresses and not stacked in between mattresses.
Furniture, fittings and equipment
Furniture, such as cots, beds, stretchers or mattresses and bedding used periodically needs to be hygienically stored when not in use in order to prevent cross-infection.
Further details are available in Section 10-2.
Further details on the ATIS are available in Section 5-1.
Further information about Planning, Evaluation and Assessment can be found on pages 63 to 65 of
Further information about the school planning and reporting application is below.
Further information around multi-level cots is given in PF29 Design of sleep provisions.
Further record keeping requirements are set out Chapter 11.
Future of learning and work: Learning that is relevant to the lives of New Zealanders today and throughout their lives.
GETS is a free service designed to promote open, fair competition for New Zealand Government contract opportunities.
GETS manual Tender process guide
GETS procurement officer guide
GMA1 Display of information
GMA1 Parent access to information
GMA11 Availability of documentation
GMA11 Participation records
GMA12 Availability of documentation
GMA12 Documentation available
GMA2 Information provided to parents
GMA2 Parent access to information
GMA3 Information provided to parents
GMA4 Involving parents and educators
GMA5 Philosophy statement
GMA5 Self-review and internal evaluation
GMA6 Human resource management
GMA6 Human resource management for home-based services
GMA6 Self-review and internal evaluation
GMA6A for home-based services
GMA7 Human resource management
GMA7 Human resource management for centre-based services
GMA7 Human resource management for hospital-based services
GMA7A for centre-based services
GMA7A for hospital-based services
GST will be charged on the levy.
Gates need to have a working locking mechanism so children cannot open them unassisted.
GenAI case study - Aotea College
GenAI case study - Hobsonville Point Secondary School
GenAI in NCEA assessment - frequently asked questions
General Manager, Asset Management (Acting)
General education resources (for example: playground equipment and furniture).
General operating costs (for example: police vetting, teacher certification costs and electricity or water bills).
General property maintenance (for example: painting, heating systems, roofing and gardening).
General purpose financial reports
General purpose financial statements
General questions and comments
Generally unwell, fever, headache, vomiting
Generally unwell, fever, headache, vomiting, sometimes a rash. Urgent treatment is required.
Generally, if we collect information for a particular purpose, we only use it for that purpose. We can only use the information for another purpose where we are allowed or required to do so by the law, or with permission from the person in question.
Generation of between $5,000-$19,999.99 in ECE Funding Subsidy, 20 Hours ECE funding and Equity Funding payments between 1 June and 31 May each year.
Geraldine District Free Kindergarten Association
Get ideas about different kinds of play.
Getting a Holidays Act remediation payment
Getting help if your child is not attending regularly
Getting on with others, managing your own impulses and understanding what are seen as appropriate behaviours are fundamental areas of learning for children. Adults in playgroups have an important role to play in providing children with consistent, sound and positive guidance as they relate to, communicate and interact with the people, places and things in their environments.
Getting support from your early learning service
Gisborne Free Kindergarten Association Incorporated
Give each user an individual login. Shared accounts make it harder to:
Give them plenty of clear fluids to drink (water). Keep them cool if there is a fever and warm if they are cold.
Glossary of terms for certification criteria for playgroups.
Glossary of terms for licensing criteria for centre-based ECE services.
Glossary of terms for licensing criteria for home-based ECE services.
Glossary of terms for licensing criteria for hospital-based ECE services.
Go to 'Understanding the Rules and Guidelines'
Go to Education Learning Management System at
Going to school every day is important for students to develop skills for lifelong learning.
Good access to an ample supply of water that is fit to drink needs to be provided for children attending. Older children need to be able to access this water independently.
Good morning everyone. It's, uh, it's great to see.
Good planning and design will often prevent noise level concerns.
Good practice for any service provider is to have policies and procedures in place to deal with a range of complaints from a variety of sources. These may come from a parent, a member of the community or a staff member. They may be about a specific teaching practice, routine or policy, an event, a particular staff member, a member of the management team or board, or about the service in general.
Good practice for any service provider is to have policies and procedures in place to deal with a range of complaints from a variety of sources. These may come from:
Google Analytics opt-out browser add-on
Google Analytics privacy policy
Google Smart Lock, which is available on some Android phones and Chromebook.
Google has guidance on setting up 2FA for Google Workspace and email.
Governance, management and administration
Governance, management and administration criteria for centre-based ECE services.
Governance, management and administration criteria for home-based ECE services.
Governance, management and administration criteria for hospital-based ECE services.
Government Electronic Tender Service (GETS)
Government decisions on the Early Childhood Education (ECE) Regulatory Review
Government education agencies support many IT applications needed by school leaders and staff, education providers and sector suppliers. Learn about
Grass is an ideal surface for most outdoor activities. It can also be used as a safety surface for equipment under 1 metre in height. It has the advantage of staying cool in hot weather and is suitable for both walking and crawling children.
Grass is an ideal surface for most outdoor activities. It can also be used as a safety surface for equipment under one metre in height. It has the advantage of staying cool in hot weather and is suitable for both walking and crawling children.
Ground floor and level 1, 102 Rosedale Road
Ground floor, 10 Montel Avenue
Group supervision requirements for quality funding
Group supervision requirements for standard funding
Grow, retain and value highly competent teachers, leaders and educational professionals with diverse Pacific whakapapa.
Growing Pacific Languages in Education
Guidance about information sharing under the Act is on the
Guidance about information sharing under the Family Violence Act is on the Ministry of Justice website.
Guidance and examples of conflicts of interest
Guidance and resources for contractors, providers and suppliers working on school infrastructure and property projects and planning.
Guidance and resources for education professionals managing and working in early learning services.
Guidance and resources for education professionals on the use of artificial intelligence in schools.
Guidance and resources for our education workforce, including principals, teachers and kaiako.
Guidance for Unfunded International Providers (UIPs)
Guidance for criterion PF16 Kitchen facilities provides information about domestic and commercial dishwashers. If your centre is considering installing a dishwasher you need to consult your local district health board public health unit for advice about dishwashers and hot water requirements for ECE centres. Guidance is also provided for centres that do not have a dishwasher and wash dishes by hand.
Guidance for developing a complaints policy/process for ECE
Guidance for developing a complaints policy/process for an ECE Service
Guidance for education professionals about attendance, enrolment, and managing students in schools and kura.
Guidance for education professionals about funding and staffing in schools and kura.
Guidance for education professionals about the administration and management of schools and kura.
Guidance for suppliers and providers about the administration and management of early learning services, schools and kura.
Guidance staffing is a roll generated component.
Guidance to support accelerating student progress
Guidance: Annual financial reporting on key areas
Guidelines concerning the provision of potable (drinkable) water should be available from your district health board.
Guidelines for Targeted Funding
Guidelines for Targeted Funding for Disadvantage
Guidelines for risk assessment
Guidelines for state school enrolment schemes
Guidelines for state-integrated school enrolment schemes
HS 12 Hazard and risk management
HS1 Hospital legislation compliance
HS1 Premises and contents are safe and hygienic
HS1 Premises maintained and hygienic
HS10 Hazard and risk management
HS10 Inappropriate material
HS10 Sleep furniture spacing
HS10 Storage of sleep furniture and bedding
HS11 Child protection for playgroups
HS11 Storage of sleep furniture and bedding
HS12 Hazard and risk management
HS12 Incident notification to the Ministry of Education
HS12 Medicine administration
HS13 Child protection for hospital-based services
HS13 Temperature of hot water from taps children can access
HS14 Hot water cylinder temperature
HS14 Inappropriate material
HS15 Travel by motor vehicle
HS16 Alcohol and other substances at the service
HS18 Travel by motor vehicle
HS19 Supervision while eating
HS2 Premises and contents are safe and hygienic
HS22 Child health and wellbeing
HS22 First aid qualifications
HS22 Supervision while eating
HS23 Response to infectious illnesses
HS24 Medical assistance and incident management
HS25 First aid qualifications
HS25 Medicine administration
HS26 Response to infectious illnesses
HS27 Children washed when soiled
HS27 Medical assistance and incident management
HS28 Child protection for home-based services
HS28 Medicine administration
HS29 Inappropriate material
HS3 Nappy changing procedure
HS30 Children washed when soiled
HS30 Use of alcohol and other substances by coordinators and educators
HS31 Child protection policies for centre-based services
HS31 Use of alcohol and other substances by other people at the home
HS32 Inappropriate material
HS33 Alcohol and other substances
HS33 Incident notification to the Ministry of Education
HS34 Incident notification to
HS34 Incident notification to the Ministry of Education
HS4 Emergency plan and supplies
HS4 Fire evacuation scheme
HS7 Emergency plan and supplies
HS7 Travel by motor vehicle
HS9 Alcohol and other substances
HS9 Sleep furniture spacing
Half doors or hinged gates are effective and practical ways of restricting access to kitchen facilities. If you are considering the use of fixed barriers, such as plywood panels fitted into slots, think about how these might work in practice.
Half-credit means that each hour worked in the relevant role should be counted as half an hour of work for salary purposes.
Half-day opening requirement 2024
Half-day opening requirement 2025
Half-day opening requirement 2026
Half-service means that each hour worked in the relevant role should be counted as half an hour of work for purposes of calculating experience in an immersion environment.
Hamish Anton (Deloitte) presentation.
Hard copies of the 2023 refreshed action plan for early learning centres, schools and tertiary institutions will be available to order from the end of September 2023.
Hard surfaces should be kept clean, and equipment or toys should be kept hygienic. Toys and materials that children put in their mouths should be cleaned at the end of each day with hot soapy water or put in a washing machine/dishwasher depending on the toy.
Hard surfaces should be kept clean, and equipment or toys should be kept hygienic. Toys and materials that children put in their mouths should be cleaned at the end of each day with hot soapy water or put in the washing machine/dishwasher depending on the toy.
Has a child had a history of early reflux? If so, extra vigilance over the introduction of new foods is essential.
Have some throwing and catching games with soft balls or small bean bags.
Have to travel an unreasonable distance (approximately 50kms) to the nearest state, state-integrated school or
Have to travel longer than 45 minutes one way to their nearest state, state-integrated school or
Having a process whereby the attendance records are collected or delivered to the service provider every 3 months (or after each funding period) could minimise the likelihood of loss or damage.
Having a roster of jobs can be helpful for the day-to-day running of a playgroup. A roster lets everyone know who is doing what and helps a playgroup session run smoothly.
Having a sink with a hot water supply enables hand washing of items hygienically and to obtain hot water for other purposes, such as cleaning food preparation surfaces.
Having regard for the National Education and Learning Priorities (NELP) means being able to demonstrate in the documented annual plan how relevant key tasks for example curriculum review or policy review align with priorities 1 to 6 of the NELP.
Having regard for the National Education and Learning Priorities (NELP) means being able to demonstrate in the documented annual plan how relevant key tasks for example curriculum review or policy review align with priorities 1 to 6 of the NELP. Services will need to ensure those involved in the creation of the annual plan are familiar with priorities 1 to 6 of the NELP.
Having the building too warm could lead to lethargy in children and adults.
Having your playgroup education programme consistent with the curriculum framework means the principles and strands of
Hayden attends 8 hours on Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday, and 4.5 hours on Thursday and Fridays.
Hazard and risk management at early learning services
Hazards and risk management
Hazards and risks must also be managed on any excursion outside the home. See HS14 (below) for more guidance.
Hazards and risks must also be managed on any excursion outside the hospital. See HS6 for more guidance.
Hazards and risks must also be managed on any excursion when children leave the service. See HS17 for more guidance.
Head lice are very common in young children and are easily spread. They are very treatable, but make sure you let your early learning service know if your child has head lice. This is so they can let other families know and take steps to reduce the spread, such as removing dress-up clothing until the outbreak clears.
Headache, vomiting, sore throat
Health & Safety at Work Act 2015
Health and Safety at Work Act 2015
Health and safety at early learning
Health and safety criteria for centre-based ECE services.
Health and safety in early learning
Health and safety management
Health and safety of adults
Health and safety of educators
Health and safety practices
Health and safety practices criteria for home-based ECE services.
Health and safety practices criteria for hospital-based ECE services.
Health and safety practices criteria for playgroups.
Health and safety standards
Health services for young children
Health, safety and wellbeing
Healthy School Lunches Programme
Hearing screening checks are available to all newborn babies to identify hearing loss early. If your child didn't have a newborn hearing check and you are concerned about their hearing, talk to your doctor. We work with families to provide supports once a need is identified.
Heavy furniture, fixtures and equipment that could fall or topple and cause serious injury or damage are secured.
Heavy furniture, fixtures, and equipment in any ECE activity room that could fall or topple and cause serious injury or damage are secured.
Help with employment issues
Helping Pacific early learning services strengthen their governance and management skills.
Helping schools provide opportunities for Year 7 to 13 students to become financially capable, learn about civics, and develop key workplace competencies.
Here are some quick and easy ways to implement least privilege:
Heretaunga Free Kindergarten Association
High incidence of bloody diarrhoea, stomach pain
High rate of hospitalisation and complications
High rise evacuation plans for ECE service providers
Highchairs or seats that attach to the edge of a table can be used as places for infants and young toddlers to sit while eating. Low tables and small chairs for sitting infants to eat their meals can help foster greater independence. Their use should be supervised. See the guidance for HS22 Supervision while eating.
Highchairs or seats that attach to the edge of a table can be used as places for infants and young toddlers to sit while eating. Their use should be supervised (see the guidance for HS19 Supervision while eating).
Higher funding rates are available to education and care and hospital-based services who attest to paying all employed certificated teachers at least the amounts described in the salary scale in the next sub section.
Higher funding rates are available to education and care services that agree to pay all employed certificated teachers at or above certain minimum salary levels.
Higher funding rates are available to education and care services who pay all employed certificated teachers at least the minimum salaries described in Appendix 4.
Higher funding rates are available to education and care services who pay all employed certificated teachers service at or above certain minimum salary steps.
Higher funding rates are available to education and care services, who pay all certificated teachers employed in a Management Position at or above the management salary step.
Highest ECE or organization qualification held.
Highest Needs Change Programme Report Back
Highest Needs Review - Minute of Decision
Highest Needs Review Change Programme 2023 Workplan
Hold a home-based service qualification or within 6 months of joining a home-based service, be enrolled in a course offering a home-based qualification and complete the qualification within the timeframes below:
Hold a recognised home-based qualification or by 1 July 2025, be enrolled in a course of study offering a home-based qualification and complete the qualification within the timeframes below:
Holding a ballot for out-of-zone applications
Holidays Act Programme (Ministry payroll)
Holidays Act remediation payment for former Ministry employees
Holidays Act remediation: How calculations were made
Holidays and mandatory half-days are statutory requirements for state and state-integrated schools and kura.
Home Education application
Home and distance learning
Home based service providers can apply for emergency closure for individual educators in the following situations:
Home education is different from enrolling your child at
Home education, also known as homeschooling, can be an alternative to attending school in New Zealand. You'll need to apply for an exemption from attending school first.
Home settings provide children with opportunities to engage in experiences that are relevant to their own lives. Children should be able to access equipment and materials that support their interests, skills and abilities.
Home-based ECE excursion planning checklist
Home-based ECE excursion risk assessment
Home-based ECE licensing criterion HS25 requires parental consent for administering medicine, following the requirements for each category.
Home-based ECE record of special excursions
Home-based ECE services: 3-B-4
Home-based attendance address.
Home-based daily hazard checklist
Home-based early learning services are moving towards a fully qualified workforce.
Home-based education and care declaration
Home-based education and care services
Home-based education and care services.
Home-based educator top up payments
Home-based educators holding a current first aid certificate with unit standard 25459 will continue to meet licensing requirements until their certificate expires. Then they must gain a new certificate with unit standards 6401 and 6402.
Home-based service individual educators' emergency closure
Home-based service providers and educators will need to work together to determine which emergency drills are relevant to their location. Relevant drills are likely to at least include fire evacuation, earthquake, shelter in place and lockdown. Tsunami drills are relevant for services in tsunami zones.
Home-based service providers and educators will need to work together to ensure there is a plan developed for dealing with emergencies.
Home-based service providers must make their 20 Hours ECE educator pass through part of documentation provided to parents/caregivers.
Home-based service providers, who have gained emergency closure approval for individual home-based educator emergency closure, should record the children enrolled with this educator as absent. Normal absence rules apply.
Home-based services are in the process of becoming a more qualified workforce.
Home-based services are supervised by coordinators who are certificated teachers.
Home-based services may use a portable cot if it:
Home-based services must take steps to minimise the contact of children with any person who has an infectious illness.
Home-based staff qualification changes
Homes are grouped together in a service, the person or organization that operates the group of homes is the service provider.
Homes are not always designed with large storage areas. Consider how to best use existing storage areas, that is, cabinets or cupboards, to provide the storage needed.
Homes are not always designed with small groups of children in mind, and educators need to manage any difficulties presented by the configuration of the premises.
Homes in rural or isolated areas that are not on a town water supply and use springs, bores or water tanks need to ensure that the water is fit to drink.
Homes must have sufficient indoor space for group learning and homes also need to have some outdoor space to allow for physical activity. For the indoor and outdoor space requirements, see the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008.
Homes need adequate facilities to cater for occasions when a child needs to rest or sleep. How a service provides these facilities depends on what suits the home layout and parent expectations. It is preferable that a separate room is available so that, when a child chooses to sleep, there is a quiet area provided.
Homes will have different floor types. If easy to clean floors are not available, consider laying down a coversheet over existing flooring to enable children to engage in creative or messy activities.
Hospital based services need to provide evidence that there is a current certificate issued to the hospital under the Health and Disability Services Act 2001.
Hospital managers should consult with and engage the ECE service in any budget development that may impact on the service and senior service staff should be consulted on how MOE funding is used.
Hospital play specialists kaiako, teachers, supervisors, parent helpers,
Hospital services are entitled to use notional rolls to calculate their Funded Child Hours (FCH). Please contact your regional Ministry Office to discuss or apply to be on a notional roll.
Hospital-based ECE services
Hospital-based services are entitled to 80 discretionary hours per funding period, when a certificated reliever is not available. The record-keeping requirements outlined in chapter 3-B-2 also apply to hospital-based services. This includes the obligation to submit a report to the Ministry on the discretionary hours used each funding period.
Hospital-based services are entitled to a notional roll because of the fluctuations in roll that the service is likely to encounter.
Hospital-based services are licensed in accordance with the Education and Training Act 2020 under the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008, which prescribe minimum standards that each licensed service must meet. Licensing criteria are used to assess how the services meet the minimum standards required by the regulations.
Hospital-based services are teacher-led services that provide education and care to children under the age of 6 who are receiving health services within premises under the control of the Ministry of Health.
Hospital-based services have slightly different requirements; this is covered in
Hospital-based services must keep the same staff records as education and care services.
Hospital-based services will need to consider in advance the steps they would take if any adult providing education and care was found to be under the influence of alcohol or any other substance having a detrimental effect on their functioning or behaviour. This is a staff management issue and appropriate procedures would need to be followed.
Hours of 20 hours ECE per week.
Hours of work relates to the total hours required for a certificated
Hours of work relates to the total hours required for a certificated kaiako to properly fulfil the duties and responsibilities connected with their employment. This will include, rostered hours, non-contact hours, staff meetings, paid professional learning and development and any paid leave
Hours of work relates to the total hours required for a teacher to properly fulfil the duties and responsibilities connected with their employment. This will include, rostered hours, non-contact hours, staff meetings, paid professional learning and development and any paid leave.
Hours that count towards an initial salary step
Hours that count towards salary progression
How Targeted Funding benefited the children in their service.
How Targeted Funding benefited the children within the service.
How Targeted Funding was spent.
How a conflict of interest happens
How about in this example, if the whanau is asking
How adults should interact with children when changing nappies.
How are all educators and coordinators supported to evaluate their role as
How are babies kept safe from other children while they are being changed?
How are children and their
How are children empowered in this routine/care moment?
How are children kept safe from falls or other hazards?
How are children, and their parents and
How are hazard and risk identification processes and practices reviewed and updated?
How are learning goals set for children, and who does this?
How are maintenance issues communicated to the person in charge or governance committee for any repairs or replacement?
How are maintenance issues communicated to the person responsible or governance committee for any repairs or replacement?
How are other children at the home supervised when the educator is changing a nappy?
How are reciprocal and responsive relationships fostered? That is, talking to the child about what is happening
How are reciprocal relationships reflected in our setting?
How are soiled nappies stored and disposed of or given to parents to take home for disposal?
How are the service's hazard and risk management checklists reviewed and used to inform the service's management and practice, for example supervision, maintenance, repairs?
How are we aware of the concepts of
How are we seeking guidance from mokopuna in creating an environment that they find comforting, engaging, and meaningful?
How centres provide safe and hygienic places for children to sit while eating will differ from centre to centre. Some centres will choose to have a separate dining room, but this is not a requirement.
How children are kept safe from falls or other hazards.
How children can be empowered in this routine/care moment.
How children will be supervised while they are
How costs are turned into funding rates
How could you as the parent or caregiver help?
How do children access/revisit their learning if it is held on digital platforms?
How do children have opportunities to review and extend their own learning? How do our approaches to documenting children's learning reflect our service, its philosophy and community?'
How do children have opportunities to review and extend their own learning? How do our approaches to documenting children's learning reflect our service, its philosophy, and the community?
How do children learn what is expected of them while eating? For example, to remain seated until they have finished eating
How do children learn what is expected of them while eating? For example, to remain seated until they have finished eating?
How do different theories that guide our practice connect with each other? How are they different?
How do educators and coordinators learn about the languages and cultures of all parents and
How do my own personal values impact on, and influence my teaching practice?
How do our educators and coordinators support all children to develop prosocial strategies for learning with and alongside others?
How do our own personal values impact on and influence our teaching practice?
How do our own values and assumptions impact on our decision whether or not to seek support?
How do our policies provide a clear process for identifying when additional support is needed, and for seeking that support?
How do our policies provide a clear process for identifying when support is needed, and for seeking that support?
How do our relationships and interactions reflect relevant theories and good practice in early childhood education?
How do our self-review processes support children knowing about and understanding their own and others' culture?
How do our understandings of
How do our wider relationships with colleagues, parents, and the community influence our provision of a language-rich environment? What tools and strategies do we have to support the provision of a language-rich environment?
How do parents and caregivers keep the area/mat/change table clean between nappy changes?
How do parents and caregivers nominate a caregiver?
How do playgroup members find out about the emergency procedures?
How do the tools/resources in your service curriculum reflect what parents and
How do we access knowledge that will assist us to support/enhance the learning for all children?
How do we acknowledge the role of parents and
How do we articulate to others why we do things, and what we are doing?
How do we bring our understanding of
How do we build relationships with the supports and services in our area?
How do we collect parent and
How do we communicate with parents and
How do we create a sense of belonging for everyone in our service including educators, and other adults?
How do we create a sense of belonging for everyone in our service, including
How do we create a supportive environment in which all children are able to access and contribute to a rich and rewarding curriculum? (
How do we create an atmosphere that enables free sharing of ideas and opinions?
How do we create an environment that recognises and appreciates the expertise parents and
How do we empower parents and
How do we encourage contributions from children, their families, and all staff, including medical?
How do we encourage parents and
How do we ensure our processes enable initial informed consent and ongoing consent if required?
How do we ensure our processes enable initial informed consent and ongoing consent, if required?
How do we ensure that every child has the opportunity to develop a strong, reciprocal relationship with at least one educator?
How do we ensure that every child has the opportunity to develop strong, reciprocal relationships with
How do we ensure that every child has the opportunity to develop strong, reciprocal relationships with educators?
How do we ensure that management and
How do we ensure that management and educators understand the principle of partnership inherent in
How do we ensure that management, educators, and coordinators understand their role to provide mokopuna with culturally responsive environments that support their learning and ensure that they experience equitable opportunities to learn?
How do we ensure that parents and
How do we ensure that parents understand the practices and procedures of our service?
How do we ensure that we have an understanding of other world views and ways that these may influence learning outcomes for the child?
How do we ensure the provision of meaningful and respectful cultural experiences?
How do we ensure the voices and aspirations of former refugee and migrant parents and
How do we ensure there are sufficient adults in any one area to at least meet the minimum ratios standard and for meaningful interactions?
How do we ensure we use a strengths-based approach which enhances the
How do we ensure we use a strengths-based approach which enhances the mana of all when seeking support and guidance?
How do we establish a shared understanding of what social and emotional competence looks like, feels like, and sounds like in our service?
How do we evaluate how effectively the curriculum is supporting the strengths, abilities, and competencies of all children?
How do we evaluate how effectively we are enhancing outcomes for
How do we evaluate how our level of engagement with children and families impacts on learning outcomes for children?
How do we go about making contact with specialist services? Do we know where all our local community facilities are?
How do we identify what works well and what the barriers are to meaningful assessment, planning, and evaluation?
How do we include and respond to the diverse strengths and needs of children, parents,
How do we involve parents and
How do we involve parents when accessing specialist services?
How do we know that children and
How do we know that our service curriculum is embedded in reciprocal and responsive relationships?
How do we know that our service curriculum reflects the holistic way children learn and grow? What does holistic learning look like?
How do we know that our service empowers children?
How do we make decisions about our focus for professional development?
How do we manage challenging behaviours in respectful and dignified ways?
How do we perceive or view children, and how do we express our perceptions or views?
How do we reflect on or monitor the language we use with children, families and each other?
How do we reflect the wider world of family and community within our service curriculum?
How do we respond to diverse family structure and values, socio-economic status, religion, and beliefs within our curriculum?
How do we support and enable children who are non-verbal to make choices within our programme?
How do we support and enable infant and toddlers who are non-verbal to make choices within our curriculum?
How do we take responsibility to extend our knowledge and use of
How do we understand parents and
How do you ensure that sufficient essential resources such as nappies, food, water and essential medical supplies are available?
How do you establish a shared understanding of what social and emotional competence looks like, feels like, and sounds like in your service?
How do you explain to others what real choice for children is? Who answers this question?
How do you know that children and
How do you manage setting up and packing away if premises need to be cleared for use by other groups after each session?
How do you promote academic integrity?
How does Cloudflare protect email addresses on website from spammers?
How does curriculum leadership happen in our team?
How does curriculum leadership happen in our team? How do we develop curriculum leadership?
How does our behaviour demonstrate that we value and respect diversity?
How does our curriculum reflect gender and ethnicity, diversity of ability and learning needs?
How does our curriculum reflect gender and ethnicity, diversity of ability, and learning needs?
How does our image of the child influence our teaching practice?
How does our professional learning change our perspectives of
How does our professional learning change our perspectives on
How does our service curriculum include strategies to fully include all children?
How does our service curriculum include strategies to understand and respond to the diverse strengths and needs of
How does our service encourage and/or support educators to extend their knowledge and use of
How does our service integrate advice from specialist services into the curriculum?
How does our team challenge discriminatory practices and behaviour in our service?
How does our team challenge issues to do with fairness and social justice?
How does our team challenge issues to do with fairness and social justice? How are parents and
How does our team define an engaged learner?
How does the educator interact with children when changing nappies?
How does the language that we use empower children?
How does the language we use demonstrate our understanding of relevant theories and good practice?
How does the use of GenAI relate to academic integrity?
How does the way our day is set up influence the experiences for children? How are children empowered to influence how the day is organised?
How does your school policy outline your preferred approach to referencing source material, including referencing GenAI?
How does your school policy warn about bias and inaccurate information being generated by GenAI?
How early learning services or service providers choose to communicate this information to parents is at their discretion.
How effective are the ways we engage with parents and
How effective are the ways we engage with parents? How do we measure this?
How entitlement staffing is calculated
How frequently head counts/roll checks will be made during the excursion.
How have those outcomes informed the current self-review/internal evaluation?
How hazards and risks will be identified
How hazards and risks will be identified?
How independence can be fostered.
How is funding calculated?
How is independence fostered?
How is it reflected in our service?
How is our assessment practice embedded in reciprocal and responsive relationships?
How is our environment set up? Who makes the decisions about how our environment is set up? Where does assessment for learning figure in this?
How is our service staffing organised to ensure consistent relationships?
How is our understanding of what the strands mean in our service guided by the principles?
How is the maintenance of premises and equipment documented, managed and budgeted for?
How is the nappy changing area cleaned and disinfected? When/how often?
How is this partnership reflected in the policies and practices of the service as identified in the governance and management criteria?
How long ago the safety check was done.
How long it takes to process requests
How much equipment you'll need
How much notice do I have to give for holidays?
How much the boarding allowance is
How much will I pay for the hours my child attends?
How much you are paid depends on how many children you are taking to school and how far you have to travel. The allowance is paid at a daily rate so your payment will vary depending on how many school days are in the term.
How much you can get involved in your child's early learning centre can depend on the type they are enrolled in.
How often will review and evaluations take place?
How our learning support teams work with schools and
How our learning support teams work with schools and kura
How parents of children attending the service are provided with the opportunity to contribute to the review and evaluation?
How parents will be informed of this procedure (for example at point of enrolment, as part of induction process to service).
How processes for updating the identification of hazards and risks on a regular basis will be updated?
How readily can adults provide for the safe and comfortable washing of a sick or soiled infant, toddler or child?
How readily can educators provide for the safe and comfortable washing of a sick or soiled child?
How reciprocal and responsive relationships are fostered, for example talking to the child about what is happening.
How satisfied are we with what is happening now?
How school enrolment schemes work in Aotearoa New Zealand.
How school-to-school exchanges work
How schools are included in the programme
How services meet the intent of "all reasonable steps" will be determined by their specific contexts. As a general guide, "reasonable" steps for the Persons responsible (Co-ordinator / visiting teacher) to take to observe a child each month might include:
How services support and organise staff to ensure that children experience stable and predictable relationships with educators is important to enhance learning and care experiences for children.
How sleep times and checks will be recorded and the information relayed to parents and stored.
How the Education and Training Act 2020, regulations and criteria apply to early learning services.
How the Ministry will develop and consult on enrolment schemes
How the allowance is paid
How the attendance service works
How the disease is spread
How the learning at playgroup will happen
How the nappy changing area is cleaned and disinfected, when/how often and by whom.
How the premises will be arranged, across all indoor and outdoor spaces likely to be used at any time while children are attending the home, to enhance supervision of children.
How the risks to children and adults will be mitigated.
How they have spent Targeted Funding.
How this information will be communicated to parents.
How this links to Ka Hikitia
How this links to Tau Mai Te Reo
How to access and allocate National Student Numbers (NSNs) for new enrolments.
How to access the attendance service
How to apply the frequent absence rule
How to apply the right levels of access
How to apply to home educate your child
How to calculate pay parity salary steps
How to complete the staff record
How to find legal information
How to find the required roll information
How to find your daily school bus route map
How to have regard for the NELP
How to identify harm to children and report it
How to implement least privilege
How to make up a 0.1% bleach solution
How to report suspected abuse or neglect
How to request official information
How to set up least privilege
How to set up the School Planning and Reporting role for users on the School Planning and Reporting Application.
How to submit a roll return
How to submit data and pay
How to support families to apply for SESTA
How to technically set up least privilege
How to use Targeted Funding - 13-3
How to use discretionary hours
How transitions will be managed to/from the destination including from vehicles/transport and any parking area.
How useful is the information we gather about children?
How we calculate entitlement staffing
How we calculate your funding
How we collect your information
How we investigate a complaint or incident in early learning
How we keep your information safe
How we use resourcing rolls to calculate operating funding
How we use resourcing rolls to calculate operational funding
How we will deliver this priority
How we'll protect information
How will body waste and wastewater be disposed of safely and hygienically?
How will storage facilities be arranged to ensure easy access, minimise congestion and ensure safety?
How will the educator manage getting equipment (such as buggies) and children safely in and out of the car?
How will the educator supervise other children while washing a sick or soiled child?
How will the range of indoor and outdoor equipment and material be stored?
How will the service better engage with their
How will visitors to the service be informed about identified hazards?
How will we identify curriculum priorities? What will this journey look like for our service and how will we document this?
How will you ensure your procedure/facility maximises adult health and safety?
How will you monitor noise in the environment once you are operating to know if you need to initiate further noise effects mitigation?
How would adults respond when children bring inappropriate material from home?
How would staff respond when children bring inappropriate material from home?
How-to information is identified by a checklist symbol.
However, anything about this, about the change itself, um,
However, services are also able to use other resources that they may have developed in-house for this purpose.
However, services can use other resources that may have been developed in-house for this purpose.
However, services must at least specify:
However, these services can submit their RS7 Return through ELI, if they wish to.
However, um, it would be for the board to decide as well.
Huia Playcentre arranges for Sione to visit James Cook Primary School from 8:30am to 11:00am every Wednesday for one month before he begins attending James Cook Primary School.
Huia Playcentre is a sessional service.
Huia Playcentre is a sessional service. They claim 21 days advance funding in the Sessional column.
Huia Playcentre operates 2 sessions per day, each for 2.5 hours.
Huia Playcentre operates 2 sessions per day, each for 2.5 hours:
Huia Playcentre operates two sessions per day, each for 2.5 hours.
Huia Playcentre operates two sessions per day, each for 2.5 hours:
Hutt City Kindergartens Association
I am the manager of TE supporting the attendance codes, uh,
I at least have not been privy to anything
I believe implemented last year,
I believe it was previously called justified other.
I certify that, to the best of my knowledge, the information contained on this form is true and correct.
I graduated transition plan.
I have confidence that they will be made.
I have have this on the West coast
I know I'm fielding uh, a couple
I know that general practitioners in Nelson have been
I may be prosecuted and fined or imprisoned.
I mean, everything is nuanced
I really just want to close up now, thank you all for your time for listening. Appreciate it. Please contact us at any opportunity you may have or any questions you may have, we are here to help. Kia ora. Thank you.
I think I missed a few points out, um, from the recording.
I think it is a school level decision. I
I think it's daily, it needs to be completed, so it's,
I think that kind of, that's a good question in terms
I think that's, um, that's an unjustified absence.
I think this is a conversation that we have to have Mark
I think we, we get into that, that queue
I under, uh, we've had that before.
I understand that, um, that would've been marked present,
I want to do my best to outline, um, uh,
I will guide you through some tips to make it easier for you when you are ready to print the financial statements either for your own visual checking or providing it to the board for signing.
I will have to pay back the total amount of any overpayment and/or
I would encourage you to follow the link.
I would really love it if Marika, Tina,
I'll also show you how to hide a row that has no number or has a zero value in all three columns to improve the presentation of the financial statements and I'll show you how to format the worksheet to show a white background.
I'll just quickly find this for you.
I'll kick us off. Um, I'm Mark Keith.
I'll show you how to arrange the worksheet vertically and in synchronous side-by-side viewing in Microsoft Windows, compare your current mapping of the trial balance to the latest template, add and delete rows to the existing mapping to align to the latest template.
I'll show you how to blank each row and column in preparation for manual data entry in the input worksheet, check the blanked input worksheet balances and all the financial statements and notes are blank and balanced and how to key data into each section and to check them against your system generated financial statements.
I'll speak more to what I heard
I'll, um, Debbie, can I please ask you
I'm Catherine's asked if it's the same for primary,
I'm a project manager here at the Ministry of Education,
I'm assuming from the corridor that I've just heard,
I'm going to show you how to gather all parts of the Annual Report, upload into the Education Portal and put a copy onto the school's website.
I'm going to show you how to hide rows and notes that are not required for your school.
I'm going to show you how to quality assure each worksheet with a red coloured tab. These worksheets will form the printed pages of the financial statements.
I'm going to show you some key steps for populating the inputs worksheet manually.
I'm having issues with the chat, sorry,
I'm sorry, just to finish that one off.
I'm very excited, uh, to outline to you some, um,
I, um, I will just get the,
IE notifying FA au If two
IEM devices help to assess:
IT leads should be told in a timely manner about new or departing users and role changes for least privilege to work in practice.
ITE lift and shift presentation
Ia ra; he toromitanga i roto i te reo.
Ideally any equipment needed should be stored near the exits from the building to avoid the need to retrieve it from more distant storage areas when evacuating the building in an emergency.
Ideally, least privilege should be implemented for all systems used by your school or kura.
Ideally, toilet and handwashing facilities should be close to play areas (that is, not down long corridors) to make access for children as easy as possible.
Identify hazards and risks.
Identify the roles they and others will play during an emergency drill.
Identify your procurement needs and prepare a detailed statement of requirements.
Identifying a need for support
Identifying achievement challenges
If 12 children are attending, the service would require:
If Mae-Ling only attends from 9:00am to 1:00pm one Monday, another child (Tom) may attend from 1:00pm to 4:00pm.
If a board wants to close its school for instruction during term time, it must:
If a centre is looking at transporting children to and from the centre, the accountability for regular transport (outside enrolled and licensed hours) is to be agreed between parents and the ECE centres concerned.
If a certificated teacher is on extended leave without pay for their usual days worked, they cannot claim the allowance during this time.
If a certificated teacher works across two services that apply for the allowance the allowance will be calculated at a pro-rata amount across both services.
If a change to on-duty adults occurs and eligibility for quality funding is maintained, the service must keep a record of the change.
If a child attending a service is from a family with separated parents, the Education and Training Act 2020 sets out the right of entry to early childhood education (ECE) services for parents and guardians.
If a child attending the service is from a family with separated parents, the Education and Training Act 2020 sets out the right of entry to early childhood education (ECE) services for parents and guardians.
If a child attending your service is from a family with separated parents, the Education and Training Act 2020 sets out the right of entry to early childhood education (ECE) services for parents and guardians.
If a child cannot go home immediately, keep them away from others, perhaps by making a bed up on a couch for them and get the other children involved in an activity as far away as practical while still being able to monitor the child
If a child cannot go home immediately, keep them away from others, stay with them at all times, and give them plenty of clear fluids to drink (water). Keep them cool if there is a fever and warm if they are cold.
If a child has an unusual or complex need, services need to ensure educators trained to administer that medication, and to ensure that their training needs are met.
If a child has an unusual or complex need, services need to identify how many staff need to be trained to administer that medication, and to ensure that their training needs are met.
If a child is aged 3, 4 or 5, they are eligible for the 20 hours ECE funding scheme. The subsidy covers up to 20 hours of early childhood education each week. It can only be used for up to 6 hours a day.
If a child is eligible, they are not guaranteed a place in a vehicle as we will not always have a suitable service available. In this circumstance, the family can get the SESTA Conveyance Allowance.
If a child is injured, any required first aid is administered or supervised by an adult meeting these requirements.
If a child needs to go to hospital or the doctor, who will go with them and how will care be ensured for the other children at the centre? Ratios must still be met at the centre, and there must be a first aider remaining at the centre.
If a child needs to go to hospital or the doctor, who will go with them and how will care be ensured for the other children at the home?
If a children's worker cannot provide you with a Police certificate, they need to prove that they tried to get one. They must also make a statutory declaration under the Oaths and Declarations Act about whether they have any overseas criminal convictions.
If a complaint is made directly to your early learning service, you should follow your complaints policy and procedure.
If a complaint is made to us
If a completed RS7 return is not received for the ECE Subsidy funding cycle, the
If a completed RS7 return is not received for the ECE Subsidy funding cycle, the PITA allowance will not be paid.
If a concern involves a teacher or school staff member, the school board must suspend the person immediately while the concerns are investigated.
If a dedicated art sink is not possible at your centre, you will need to have an acceptable alternative system. Alternative systems should (as much as possible) eliminate the risk of art materials either causing contamination, or becoming contaminated by pathogens or toxic substances.
If a dedicated art sink is not possible at your centre, you will need to have an acceptable alternative system. Talk to your local health protection officer (HPO) from public health for advice about the best way to ensure hygienic practices.
If a driver decides it is unsafe to continue with their route, they can pull over. They are not permitted to remove students from the bus. They must call their employer and follow their procedures. This may include calling the police or school to remove the students concerned.
If a hazard is identified, how it will be eliminated, isolated or minimised? When will it be done? Who is responsible for this?
If a member of staff is under the influence of alcohol or any other substance, consider what action you will take. This is an employment issue and appropriate procedures would need to be followed.
If a parent chooses not to pay an optional charge, the only action a service or educator can take is to withhold the additional feature(s) covered by the optional charge. By choosing not to pay an optional charge, parents are agreeing to not have access to that additional activity or item.
If a parent has a health condition which might compromise their ability to supervise throughout the excursion, ask them to let you know.
If a playgroup closes, they will need to identify equipment purchased with Ministry of Education funds. The inventory can be used to maintain a record of these purchases.
If a plumbing fixture is not available, service providers will need to consider how they will ensure sick or soiled children are washed easily and hygienically.
If a practising certificate lapses
If a public transport option becomes available, we may stop running school buses in that area. We will give affected schools at least a full term's notice of the change.
If a scheduled sleep or rest time is part of the service's daily routine, then the service will need enough beds, mattresses, stretchers or mats for every child attending.
If a service has had to notify a specified agency of an incident, you must also notify us.
If a service is closed because of emergency, staff should ensure they are available wherever they can be of help to children, families and colleagues.
If a service is found to have not met the necessary funding conditions of the
If a service is found to have not met the necessary funding conditions of the PITA:
If a service is located within a larger premises (such as a school, church or recreation centre), then the phone services within that organisation may be used to comply with this requirement. However, there needs to be adequate systems in place to allow phone messages to be relayed back to the service, and the service to be able to use the phone to make calls when necessary and not impact on adult to child ratios.
If a service provider operates a number of services, the total funding for all those services is paid to the service provider.
If a service provider operates more than one service, funding for all services will be paid to the bank account of the service provider.
If a service was given Ministry regional office written approval for an emergency closure confirmed by letter or email and you are submitting a paper-based RS7 Return:
If a student behaves inappropriately or unsafely, you must take steps to manage this behaviour as in any other area of school life.
If a student can no longer use the school bus because a route is changed, they may be able to get other transport assistance.
If a student loses their place on the school bus, their caregiver is still responsible for getting them to school. Caregivers aren't entitled to a conveyance allowance in this situation and the student is still legally required to go to school.
If a teacher's overseas qualifications are not comparable to a New Zealand qualification, they may be able to apply for registration through a discretionary pathway.
If a teacher's practising certificate lapses, the teacher cannot continue working as a children's worker until:
If a visit has not been achieved, then this should be documented with an explanation and a description of their other attempts to see the child.
If adults suspect that during the process of exiting or re-entry to a building to secure items poses further risk to their own lives or the lives of others, then they should not do so.
If after working with us you are still not happy with how we have handled your complaint, there are a range of options for you to consider seeking a resolution.
If an ECE centre has pets they need to be appropriately housed and restrained at all times and children supervised when interacting with them. Make sure their habitats are cleaned and maintained as required depending on the needs of the animal(s).
If an activity poses a risk, parents, caregivers and educators will use their judgement to ensure that the right kind of supervision can be provided. If close supervision cannot be provided for an activity which requires it, then parents, caregivers and educators should encourage children to modify their activity or defer it until the appropriate level of supervision can be provided.
If an activity poses a risk, teachers, educators and
If an educator is an employee of a home-based service provider, home-based educator top up payments must not be charged.
If an enrolled child is absent from a home-based service and the educator, by contractual agreement, is not paid for absent children, the service provider cannot claim funding for that child for that day.
If an infant is sleeping in a cot or portable cot, the infant must not be in the same room as a bunk bed.
If an informal decision does not sort out your concern, you can make a formal complaint in writing to a support manager at your local Ministry office.
If any children eligible for 20 Hours ECE attended the service on a casual basis and received 20 Hours ECE, list the number of hours each of these children attended.
If any children under 2 years of age attended the service on a casual or conditional basis, list the number of hours each of these children attended.
If any outdoor space is used by the playgroup, it is either:
If approval is not given for the individual home-based educator absence, child absence funding cannot be claimed during this closure.
If attending a school is not the best option (you might live a long way from the nearest school, travel overseas or have other reasons) your child can learn with
If centres are unsure about the suitability of a building with other tenants for an ECE service, they should contact the local fire service office as they will provide individualised advice on the suitability of any premises and the development of an evacuation scheme.
If certification has been granted for less than 3 years, the Ministry of Education will view the Corrective Action Plan that forms part of the Hospital's Audit Report, in order to be satisfied that the relevant aspects of operation remain compliant.
If changes are proposed to a state-integrated school, the proprietor must be involved in the consultation.
If children are being taken out of the hospital grounds, then they need written parental consent.
If children are capable of standing up in their cot or bed, ensure that there are no choking hazards within reach for example curtain cords.
If children are eating outside, the educator should encourage children to:
If children are left at the centre during an excursion, the teaching staff to children ratios must be met and there must be a first aid qualified staff member at the centre.
If children need to use the facility (such as in the case of an isolation area or bodywash facility), their safety, supervision and dignity can be assured.
If children travel in a motor vehicle while in the care of the service:
If early childhood education and care centres have any concerns about interior lighting levels, they are able to contact the local regional public health officer for advice.
If early childhood education and care centres have any concerns about noise levels inside a centre, they are able to contact the local regional public health officer for advice.
If early childhood education and care centres have any concerns about noise levels, they are able to contact the local regional public health officer for advice.
If ever a dispute were to arise between a parent and service regarding the care of their child around sleep, it would be useful for the service to be able to refer the parent to the documented procedure to demonstrate that good practice occurred.
If food is provided by parents for a shared lunch a list of all food provided is required to meet this requirement
If food is provided selecting appropriate food for individual children is very important to minimise choking risk. It is important to discuss with a parent or caregiver the foods children can manage safely rather than relying on age alone as the indicator.
If furniture and items do not meet these requirements they cannot be used.
If furniture and items do not meet these requirements, then they cannot be used.
If infants, toddlers or children not walking attend, there are safe and comfortable (indoor and outdoor) spaces for them to lie, roll, creep, crawl, pull themselves up, learn to walk, and to be protected from more mobile children.
If many children become sick with the same illness at the same time, services sometimes need to close to manage these outbreaks.
If multi-level cots are used:
If multiple schools use one bus route, one school takes responsibility. This is known as the head school. They will appoint the route's head bus controller, who has some extra responsibilities.
If no antibiotic treatment, then 21 days from onset of illness or until no more coughing, whichever comes first
If no discretionary hours have been used, then no submission is required.
If no one remains at the centre during the excursion, consider leaving a written notice at the centre that is visible to visitors providing information on:
If no place in a vehicle is available, you may be able to get a payment called the SESTA Conveyance Allowance. We pay this directly to you to contribute to the costs of getting your child to school.
If not permanently set up, furniture or items intended for children to sleep on (such as cots, beds, stretchers or mattresses) and bedding is hygienically stored when not in use.
If older children are present (either after school or during holidays), the educator needs to consider internet management and monitoring.
If only attesting to paying all employed certificated teachers at least the amount described at Step 1 of the salary scale, a service may count employer KiwiSaver contributions towards the minimum salary requirement, provided it has been agreed to by the teacher and their employer.
If other agencies are also investigating, we may need to wait for their results before the incident can be closed. We will contact you with information about this.
If other children develop the illness, take a careful look at the hygiene and cleaning routines used at the home:
If other children develop the illness, take a careful look at the hygiene and cleaning routines used at your service:
If outdoor space is not available, alternative arrangements are made to provide children attending with opportunities for gross motor (physically active) play.
If possible, aim for at least 1 member of the teaching staff to be excluded from the ratio calculation. This leaves them free to manage and coordinate during any unforeseen event, or to deal with routine items such as collecting tickets, managing storage of back packs and so on.
If possible, aim for at least one of your teaching staff to be excluded from the ratio calculation. This will leave them free to manage and coordinate during any unforeseen event, or to deal with routine items such as collecting tickets, managing storage of back packs and so on.
If possible, staff should attempt to ascertain the length of time the noise might occur and if appropriate make contingency plans as to:
If providing out-of-school care, the educator needs to be aware of the space that older school children will be using, as well as any spaces that may be shared with ECE children.
If providing out-of-school care, the educator should ensure they can see and hear the children at all times. Small spaces should be kept clear of clutter and larger spaces are set up so children have clear play spaces that educators can observe.
If relevant, how are potties stored, used and cleaned?
If schools do not use the curriculum half-days granted by the Minister of Education, the minimum half-day requirement reverts to:
If setting up a separate area:
If someone else has to pick up your child, you have to let staff know in writing or, in an emergency, by text message.
If someone is under the influence of alcohol or drugs
If space allows, hospital management may be in a position to provide a separate room for the exclusive use of early childhood education staff. Where separate space is not available, staff may share space with other hospital staff.
If staff are needed to move between rooms, the service should ensure ratios are maintained in both rooms.
If staff suspect that during the process of exiting or re-entry to a building to secure items poses further risk to their own lives or the lives of others, then they should not do so.
If storage of made-up formula brought by parents is necessary, it should only be kept in the refrigerator for a maximum of 4 hours past the time it is made up.
If storage of made-up formula brought by parents is necessary, that it should only be kept in the refrigerator for a maximum of 4 hours past the time it is made up.
If the 20th of the month is a weekend or public holiday, you will be paid the next business day.
If the ECE centre is being established in an existing building, children can be protected by:
If the ECE centre is in a building with other tenants, centres need to be aware that the fire evacuation scheme approved by Fire and Emergency New Zealand applies to the whole building and all tenants, and is the responsibility of the building owner. It does not just apply to the ECE centre.
If the Teaching Council has issued or renewed a practising certificate, they will have considered them to have a satisfactory vet. Centres/services can choose to rely on this or carry out their own police vet.
If the Teaching Council has issued or renewed a practising certificate, they will have considered them to have a satisfactory vet. Playgroups can choose to rely on this or carry out their own police vet.
If the abuse or neglect is happening at a school, you should contact us so we can make sure the school is following the right processes to address the situation.
If the adult lives in a home that becomes licensed for home-based education and care, you must get their Police vet before the service begins to operate. This applies even if the person is unlikely to be present when the service is operating.
If the adult moves to a home that is already being used for home-based education and care, you must obtain their Police vet before they move in.
If the audit determines the service has been incorrectly funded the service may have their funding adjusted in the next funding cycle.
If the centre chooses to have a scheduled rest or sleep time during the day for all children, then they may choose to turn some of the activity space into a 'sleep/rest area' during that time. However, children who do not wish to sleep or rest must have somewhere to play.
If the centre decides to allow children to rest or sleep as and when they need to throughout the day (either in a separate room or in a quiet area of the service) then the stated ratio of 1 to 5 needs to be met. It is important that children have something to lie down on when they want to sleep or rest, and do not have to wait.
If the centre does not have a separate dining room, making use of existing tables and chairs within the general activity space is a practical way of providing places for children to sit and eat.
If the centre prefers to allow children to self-regulate when they need a sleep or rest, they may decide a separate sleep room is a better option for them. Or (if only one or 2 children choose to sleep at a time, and not very frequently) they may provide a quiet area within the activity space that children can go when they want to rest or sleep.
If the centre/service chooses to rely on a safety check completed on their behalf, we recommend that they:
If the child is absent or access to the home is prevented (for example, by severe weather conditions), then the visit should be rescheduled for another day in that week or the following week. It is good practice to keep records of visits and any reason for rescheduling.
If the child is present, the scheduled visit goes ahead.
If the child is sleeping in a room positioned reasonably close to where other children are playing, it is easier for the educator to regularly check children.
If the child is unexpectedly asleep when the Persons responsible (Co-ordinator / visiting teacher) arrives, they can use the time while at the house to ensure other regulatory requirements, such as health and safety practices, are being met. Another visit to the child must be rescheduled for the following month.
If the child was born outside of New Zealand, a copy of their passport and visa with date of expiry (where applicable).
If the child's needs mean they could be a risk to themselves or others while in a vehicle, you will need to help the family to complete a Safe Travel Plan form. This plan outlines any measures to keep everyone safe while travelling.
If the concern involves a teacher
If the contract value is $50,000 and above (excluding GST and disbursements)
If the contract value is below $50,000 (excluding GST and disbursements), use the consultant engagement short form agreement and conditions of engagement agreement together.
If the educator provides the food:
If the effective date for the change occurs during any month in the advance period, services must count the number of advance days they will claim funding for before and after that date. This allows the Ministry to calculate the correct advance from the effective date.
If the excursion involves activities in or near water, additional supervisory precautions will be required. This means educators should have constant visual contact and be in close proximity to children at all times. If educators need to move away from the area they should take all children away from the water.
If the final value of a procurement is $50,000 or more including GST, all staff involved must sign a conflict-of-interest declaration. This must be done before they get involved in the purchasing process.
If the final value of a purchase is $25,000 or more including GST, we recommend all staff involved sign a declaration.
If the hand basins are too far away from your main meeting room and you want the children to wash their hands (after painting, or before eating, for example), you might consider using a soapy flannel (that you rinse after each child has used it) or wet wipes. Do not provide a single container (like a bucket or basin) filled with water for all the children to use as this is not hygienic.
If the height of hand basins is between 550 and 600mm from the floor for older children, and 450 to 500mm from the floor for young children, they are likely to be easily reached. Consider the age range of children who will attend.
If the home does not have a landline, the educator will need to ensure they have a means of accessing appropriate help and support.
If the home is in a building that has an approved fire evacuation scheme, the evacuation procedures must be consistent with that scheme.
If the home is in a building with other tenants there will be a fire evacuation scheme approved by the Fire and Emergency New Zealand that applies to the whole building and all tenants, and this is the responsibility of the building owner.
If the home is located in an apartment block, the building will require a code of compliance certificate and building warrant of fitness. Again, the service provider should ask for copies.
If the home is providing out-of-school care, drills need to include both the enrolled children and older out-of-school care children to ensure everyone in the home knows what to do in an emergency drill and all children can be safely evacuated.
If the home only has a cordless phone, be aware the educator will be unable to use it when the power goes off for any reason.
If the illness is infectious, contact the parents or caregivers of children with low immunity. They may want to keep their children at home until the risk of illness is over.
If the inspection is carried out by a person other than a qualified inspector a Playground Inspection Attestation Form stating that the structure/equipment is safe for use will need to be signed by the person completing the inspection.
If the number of funded child hours provided on the EC20 is higher than the actual entitlement claimed on the RS7 Return, the service will receive a reduced wash-up in the next funding payment.
If the number of funded child hours provided on the EC20 is lower than the actual entitlement claimed on the RS7 Return the service will receive the remainder of its full entitlement in the wash-up payment.
If the person is a registered teacher, the board must report this to the Teaching Council of Aotearoa. This is required under the Teaching Council Rules 2016.
If the playgroup chooses to rely on a safety check completed on their behalf, we recommend that they:
If the premises fall under Section 100 of the Building Act 2004, or Section 108 of the Building Act 2004 applies:
If the premises fall under section 100 of the Building Act 2004, or section 108 of the Building Act 2004 applies:
If the qualification is an early childhood teaching qualification at Level 7 or above, it should be completed within 4 years of enrolment.
If the rescheduled visit does not occur due to another absence by the child or access issues, a visit should be arranged for the following week. Occasionally a visit cannot take place.
If the results of a funding claim audit and/or reporting on an RS7 Return and/or RS3 Initial Application for Funding for an Early Childhood Service forms indicate that the amount of funding provided is greater than it should have been, the amount of the over funding will be:
If the school visit is not recorded, then the absence rules will be applied.
If the service decides to allow children to rest or sleep as and when they need to throughout the day (either in a separate room or in a quiet area of the service) then the stated ratio of 1 to 2 needs to be met. It is important that children have something to lie down on when they want to sleep or rest, and do not have to wait.
If the service decides to allow children to rest or sleep as and when they need to throughout the day, possibilities include:
If the service does not meet the conditions by the due date we give them, their licence may become provisional or be suspended.
If the service does not meet the conditions of the suspension notice, we may cancel its licence to operate.
If the service has not responded, by the due date, to requests made by the Ministry for services to provide complete and accurate information as required by conditions of funding and/or section 619 of the Education and Training Act 2020 through the Early Learning Information System (ELI) or any alternative authorised method, to enable the Secretary for Education or the Minister of Education to exercise their powers or carry out their responsibilities under the Education and Training Act 2020, and as permitted under Privacy Principles 10 and 11.
If the service is open, funding may be claimed for children who attend the service on that day or who are enrolled to attend on that specific public holiday.
If the service provides regular transport (outside of enrolled and licensed hours), accountability is agreed in writing between parents and the service.
If the service will have a different bank account under the service provider, an RS2 form must be completed by the new service provider of the service and returned to ECE Operational Funding.
If the student's enrolled school changes, the family need to re-apply for SESTA.
If the washing is done at the home of the educator, that it is done as a separate load to the household wash.
If the washing is taken home by parents, that it is done as a separate load to the household wash.
If their application is successful, the teacher must have a letter to give to the service. This must confirm registration via the discretionary pathway from the Teaching Council.
If there are bunk beds present in the home, they must not be used. The room with the bunk bed must be made inaccessible to children. It must be included on the hazard management checklist (HS11) for that home and the bedroom door must be closed each day.
If there are differences you will need to investigate, locate and fix these errors.
If there are not sufficient child restraints or cars/vans available for any excursion, then other transport options need to be considered.
If there are not sufficient child restraints or cars/vans available for any excursion, then other transport options will need to be considered.
If there are out-of-school care children in the home, a similar process is required so they can be isolated from other children and collected as soon as possible.
If there are pets in the home, the outdoor area of the home-based setting will need to be regularly checked for animal droppings and these removed.
If there are serious injuries or death, the Police are responsible for contacting
If there are significant hazards such as roads, rivers, or animals in close proximity to the home, consideration needs to be given to how the risk can be mitigated or managed by the educator. More guidance for rural properties is given in 'Things to consider'.
If there has been a conviction, you must take into account:
If there is a door to the area where the toilets and handwashing facilities are, this must be able to be independently opened by children.
If there is a real risk that a child will be harmed, contact the Police or
If there is a smoker or vaper in the household, they must not smoke or vape while children are attending the service. This includes the outside area.
If there is a washing machine on site, it is a good idea to have a door leading directly from the laundry to the outside area, so staff can access the washing line without walking through the centre.
If there is access to the internet (either for use with the children or in an office) consider password protection and the use of parental locks.
If there is an outdoor play area provided for children in a hospital-based setting, the service will need to consider the type of outdoor equipment to provide.
If there is an urgent risk that a child will be harmed, contact the Police or
If there is concern table surfaces are not able to be made completely hygienic through wiping, washable covers can be used as a barrier between the table and food. Covers are also a good way of showing children that the table is now an eating place rather than an activity place.
If there is immediate risk of harm
If there is not a washing machine and drying facilities on site, you may want to consider:
If there is only one signatory, please indicate that on the form.
If there was wrongdoing, we will make an offer to resolve your claim. This may include a written apology from a senior Ministry official and/or a payment to acknowledge your experiences. You are welcome to seek legal advice about our response to your claim.
If there's a problem with our website or you need help, contact us.
If this approach doesn't ensure the child restraints are used correctly, contact the Police.
If this happens, we will let you and the complainant know.
If this is difficult for you, ask a support person to do this for you or with you.
If trained relievers are available but your option cannot be maintained e.g. when the trained reliever holds a different qualification to the usual parent/
If trained relievers are not available and this is the first, second, third, fourth or fifth day/session in the current funding period where trained relievers have not been available, then service management must:
If travelling by bus where children are not restrained ensure there is adequate supervision.
If using electronic means to verify attendance records you must meet the criteria below. How the criteria are met is up to each individual service.
If we are concerned, we may ask the Education Review Office (ERO) to review your home education programme and show them your Certificate of Exemption application. If this happens, we will let you know why.
If we are considering changes to an enrolment scheme or creating a new one, we work with the school to consult with their community. This is a legal requirement.
If we are notified of a reported incident or receive a complaint, we usually contact the service provider first.
If we are the right place for your claim and you are comfortable continuing through the process, your claim will be added to the queue for an assessment.
If we decline your application, you may want to request a review of this decision. A review might be needed if:
If we do not have a mobile phone number and have an email address, we will send them an email.
If we find a health and safety issue at an early learning service that needs to be addressed immediately, we may issue written directions.
If we find areas of non-compliance, we may:
If we find no evidence of regulatory non-compliance, the complaint or incident will be closed.
If we have neither a mobile phone number nor an email address, we will send them a letter in the post.
If we have received your 1 March roll by the date specified on the roll count form, we use this. If we have not, we use the provisional roll.
If we have received your 1 March roll by the date specified on the roll count form, we use this. If we have not, we use the provisional roll. We add a new entrant adjustment in both cases.
If we have sent you a text, email or letter with a unique reference number, you are entitled to a remediation payment.
If we have their mobile phone number, they will receive a text. (To avoid the text looking like SPAM, we will not include a link. We will write the website address to go as 'education.govt.nz' which people can search themselves.)
If we identify any attendance data quality errors or issues at the end of the term, we will email you an end of term data quality report to assist you in rectifying these. Once you have rectified these errors/issues, we will be able to send you your Every Day Matters report.
If we released the information that would be contrary to other legislation or constitute contempt of court or the House of Representatives: section
If we scroll over to Column A I and to rows Ai 88 to Ai 97 we will see the school received $5,000 for the disposal of assets. This is the figure shown in the statement of cash flow and should agree with your banking records.
If we verify your details 3 business days or more before the 20th of the month, you will receive your payment on the 20th of that month.
If we verify your details less than 3 business days before the 20th of the month, you will receive your payment on or before the 20th of the next month.
If we visit unannounced, one of our officials will:
If you apply after 31 October, your application will be considered for Term 2. There is no back payment to Term 1.
If you apply by 31 October for the following year, we will let you know in December if your application is approved.
If you are a former employee and think we may have old contact details for you, email us.
If you are a parent or caregiver and want to apply for a conveyance allowance for your child, please visit the Parents and caregivers webpage for more information.
If you are a registered teacher, your code of conduct requires you to report child abuse or neglect.
If you are an IT lead or provider, see our guidance on how to technically implement least privilege at your school.
If you are an individual or community group who would like hard copies, email your request to
If you are applying for a multiple barrier boarding allowance, you must attach the completed and signed Section 3 from your referrer before you submit the application to us.
If you are applying for an
If you are applying to homeschool a child who is older than 6, they must be enrolled at a school while you do this.
If you are completing a paper-based RS7 return, this declaration will be signed. Paper-based RS7 returns must be completed in pen and signed in order to be processed for funding. Do not use pencil anywhere on your RS7 return.
If you are completing an electronic RS7 return, this declaration will be submitted.
If you are involved in buying for your school, you must declare any conflicts of interest so they can be properly and transparently managed.
If you are not happy with how an investigation has been managed, you can contact the Manager Integrated Services at your regional office.
If you are not happy with how the school has dealt with the issue, you can raise your concerns with the Teaching Council of
If you are not happy with our decision, you can contact your Regional Director of Education.
If you are not happy with the response from the school, contact your local Ministry office for support.
If you are not satisfied with our response, you can make a formal complaint with the Office of the Ombudsman.
If you are not sure about the reason why we cannot provide the information requested, or you would like more explanation, contact us.
If you are not sure, but think the illness may be infectious, contact the public health unit for information and advice.
If you are operating a centre under National Programme 2, staff must have a good level of food safety knowledge relevant to the food provided at the centre and the ability to put it into practice.
If you are purchasing an existing early learning service, and retaining existing staff from that service, you may not need to complete all seven components of the safety check for all those staff.
If you are still unhappy, you can make a formal complaint through the Office of the Ombudsman.
If you are terminally ill and/or attended Waimokoia, you may be able to choose between the prioritised payment or rapid payment options, and we will write to you with a settlement offer.
If you are unhappy with our response, you can discuss this with us. If appropriate, we can review our response. This might happen in circumstances where, for example, more information becomes available.
If you are unsure about whether a qualification meets the requirements, contact us.
If you are unsure if your service can suspend the Three Week Rule during a period in which your service will not be operating, please contact your Ministry regional office for guidance.
If you believe unjustified restraint has occurred with your
If you can organise a good system for each child to have their own towel, then individual towels can be good. The trouble is, towels usually get mixed up, and they also take up a lot of space.
If you change the number of hours your child is at their early learning service,
If you decide to change or clarify your request, that will be considered to be a new request. The 20 working days will start from the day after this new request is received.
If you do not currently have a website, we can host your annual report on our Education Counts website. Send us your request to host your annual report along with the school board's approval.
If you do not get an answer, you cannot leave it
If you do not receive a response to your request for official information within the statutory time limit or you are unhappy with the response you receive, you can complain to the Ombudsman.
If you do not think your complaint has been addressed, you can contact your regional office.
If you do not use an MDM system, you should enforce your password policy and screen lock for users.
If you feel you need more advice after talking to your school, you can contact our learning support team to talk about your concerns. They can help you to understand whether your child may need additional support, and if so, what options may be available.
If you find that safety checks have not been done, or you have any concerns about how it was done, you will need to do it yourself. If any information is incomplete or missing for any staff, you will need to do those components yourself.
If you have a complaint or concern about health and safety at your child's early learning service, you should talk to them first.
If you have a complaint or concern about your child's early learning service, you should talk to them first. There should be a complaints policy in place that is accessible to everyone.
If you have a concern or complaint about the use of seclusion in a school, contact your local Ministry office straight away.
If you have a website and are interested in protecting it in a similar way, you can
If you have an educator looking after your child at home (theirs or yours), you can still apply for 20 hours ECE. To do this, the educator must be part of a licensed home-based early learning service. The Ministry of Education pays the early learning service, not the individual educator.
If you have any enquiries or complaints about our information gathering activities or believe we have not acted in accordance with this statement, you can find out about making a complaint on our website.
If you have any feedback, contact us at
If you have any feedback, get in contact with us at
If you have any further questions about remediation for former employees of the Ministry, email the team.
If you have any questions about property procurement, email us or contact your property advisor.
If you have any questions about the RS7 Return or need help filling it in, please contact the Resourcing Contact Centre:
If you have any questions about the limitation policy, we recommend that you seek legal advice.
If you have any questions or need help with the pay parity opt-in scheme, contact us:
If you have any questions or need more information, contact our schooling data team.
If you have any questions or would like to talk to us about either of these payments, contact us.
If you have any questions, email
If you have any questions, email us at
If you have complaints related to the following organisations, raise the issues directly with the relevant organisation:
If you have concerns about a learning support service, you can make a complaint. We'll work with you to resolve it.
If you have questions about the requirements for risk assessments, contact us.
If you have trouble filling in the form, you can ask your regional office for help. While they can't fill out the application for you, they can help clarify information and answer questions about the application process.
If you have used half hour blocks, convert these blocks into whole hours.
If you highlight cells S 164 to S 184 you will be able to check the net book value of the assets disposed of.
If you include a child aged 2 or older in your under-2s ratio count, they are funded at the 2 years and older funding rate.
If you know of schools that have done similar projects, ask them about their experiences.
If you know what is causing the illness, make sure the child or staff member stays away for the recommended (or required) time.
If you live in an area close to a school (the school's zone), your child is guaranteed to get a place at that school. If you want your child to go to a school outside the area where you live, you may have to apply, and a place is not guaranteed.
If you manage school devices with a mobile device management system (MDM), such as Microsoft 365 MDM, Microsoft Intune, Google Endpoint Management, or Jamf, you should set your password policy for all those devices. You can also require users to set a screen lock.
If you move out of a zone after your child is enrolled at a school, they are entitled to remain at the school. You can also choose to enrol your child at the new local school they are in zone for.
If you need a sign language interpreter when you meet with us, we can organise for you to have the support of your preferred interpreter.
If you need access to GETS, contact us.
If you need advice about changing NSI records, you can contact our service desk for support.
If you need assistance confirming this functionality, check with your system provider or ask the system user to do this for you.
If you need assistance creating an ESL account, please ring the Education Service Desk on
If you need assistance creating an ESL account, ring the Education Service Desk on
If you need further help deciding, more detailed information and examples of the process are available.
If you need help after talking to your school, contact us.
If you need help to enrol, you can contact your regional office.
If you need help to phone us, contact the New Zealand Relay help desk.
If you need more information about your school's obligations under the Children's Act 2014 and Education and Training Act 2020, contact us.
If you need support with information sharing, contact us.
If you need to, write your password down in a diary or a notebook that nobody else has access to.
If you purchased an existing service
If you raise an issue with us, we will work with you and do our best to resolve it.
If you suspect abuse or neglect of a child or young person by an adult, you should report it. Find out who you can contact.
If you suspect abuse or neglect, you should tell someone.
If you suspect abuse or neglect, you should tell someone. You must follow your school's child protection policy, which should be on the school website, or available on request.
If you suspect someone is physically or mentally unwell in a way that could pose a risk to children, you must prevent them from coming into contact with children at your service.
If you think your password has been stolen, or your account has been accessed by someone without permission, you can:
If you use a third party to safety check your children's workers, you are responsible for confirming these are completed and that a person does not pose a risk to children.
If you want to educate your child at home instead of enrolling them at school, they need to be officially exempted from the New Zealand education system.
If you want to see policies relating to health and safety at your child's early learning service, ask the service. Most policies should be available for you to see.
If you want to stop homeschooling your child, you can enrol them at school at any time. You cannot do both at the same time, so this will cancel your child's exemption.
If you wish to reproduce images, contact
If you wish to reproduce images, email
If you work at a school or
If you would like information about your school's staffing or provisional roll, email
If you would like information or instructions on a topic not covered here, try the handbook Table of Contents or Glossary. Examples of funding forms can be found in Appendix 2.
If you would like more information about record keeping and financial reporting requirements check the following sections:
If you would like more information about record keeping and financial reporting requirements, check:
If you would like to know more about having an Education Sector Login (ESL) to access the Education Learning Management System, refer to:
If you would like to know more about having an Education Sector Login (ESL) to access the Education Learning Management System.
If you would like to know more about joining the ICT contractors panel, contact us.
If you would like to know more about joining the construction directory, contact us.
If you would like to know more about joining the offsite manufacturing supplier panel, contact us.
If you would like to know more about joining the professional services directory, contact us.
If you would like to lodge a claim about your time at a state school and you are unsure about where to go, we are happy to discuss this with you. We can also support you to talk to a school board about your concerns if you wish.
If you would like to print a copy of this handbook, refer to the list of downloads below where you will find downloadable PDF versions of each chapter.
If you would like to set up a meeting with one of our staff, please call 09 632 9400.
If you're a student or parent of student interested in a school-to-school exchange, talk to your school.
If you're having trouble reaching us on social media, you can email us or get in touch with one of our local offices.
If you're not getting the help that you need from your school, you can contact us. Our regional offices will be able to support you to get the help you need.
If you're not happy with your school's term dates
If you're parked in our accessible car park on level 1, use the lift from level 1 to make your way to the reception.
If you're still not happy with how we're handling your complaint
If your application for the allowance is approved, you will receive the payment as long as your child is eligible. You do not need to reapply for it each year.
If your application is turned down, we will send you a letter explaining our reasons. You can appeal the decision in writing to your regional office. If your appeal is unsuccessful, you can submit a new application to your regional office.
If your average roll is higher than your March funding roll, you can apply for extraordinary roll growth funding.
If your average roll is higher than your quarterly funding roll, you can apply for extraordinary roll growth funding.
If your baby is bottle-fed, they should be held or properly supervised by staff.
If your child becomes unwell, centre staff or your child's home educator will call you and ask you to come and take your child home.
If your child doesn't qualify for SESTA, there may be other support available.
If your child gets sick or injured at their early learning service or
If your child goes to more than one early learning service or
If your child has a notifiable disease, your service will need to report it.
If your child has an issue, finding it early is good for their learning and development.
If your child has extra needs
If your child has food allergies, intolerances, or follows religious food guidelines, you should make a plan with your early learning service when you enrol.
If your child has naps during the day, talk to your early learning service about their routine and how long your child should sleep for. You can do this when you enrol, and as your child gets older and their nap times change.
If your child has safety or mobility needs that mean they cannot travel independently, you may be able to get help from the Specialised School Transport Assistance (SESTA) service instead.
If your child is aged 16 to 19, they can also enrol with
If your child is eligible for transport assistance, we may provide:
If your child is ineligible for school transport assistance
If your child is not enrolled at school or kura
If your child is private boarding with a caregiver, their contact and bank account details need to be given to your child's school. The school will then pay the caregiver.
If your child leaves school before the end of a term, we will recover the remaining allowance.
If your child lives far away from the closest school they can enrol at, they may qualify for a free school bus or financ
If your child lives far away from the closest school they can enrol at, they may qualify for a free school bus or financial support.
If your child lives far away from the nearest school, or faces significant difficulties, we may be able to assist with the cost of boarding.
If your child lives too far from their school to travel there each day, they might qualify for an allowance to assist with the cost of boarding away from home.
If your child lives very far from school
If your child needs specialist equipment to travel, ask your school to apply for this.
If your child needs to take medicine at their early learning services, you will need to provide written authority for the administration of that medicine to your child. This applies to prescription and non-prescription medications.
If your child uses dummies (pacifiers) to sleep, talk to your centre about whether they allow this.
If your child wants to transition to school, you should contact your regional office. They will assist you with the process.
If your child went to school, we will contact them for information about your child's education so far.
If your child will be transitioning out of nappies while enrolled at an early learning service, you can talk to staff about supporting your child.
If your child would be eligible to use the school bus if they attended their closest school, but is enrolled at a school further away, they may be able to use the school bus at their enrolled school. Your school can give you information about the school bus and tell you if your child qualifies.
If your child's behaviour while travelling is disruptive or is a safety risk, they may lose their place on the school bus. If this happens you cannot get the conveyance allowance.
If your child's boarding situation changes, you need to let us know as soon as possible so we can review their new circumstances.
If your child's legal guardian has been assigned by a Court, provide us with a copy of the Court Order.
If your child's need is due to an injury and covered by the Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC), they are not eligible for help from SESTA. Contact ACC for more information about what support might be available.
If your child's needs mean they could be a risk to themselves or others while in a vehicle, you'll need to complete a Safe Travel Plan form. This plan outlines any measures needed to keep everyone safe while travelling. Complete this form with support from your school and include it with your application.
If your child's school changes, you'll need to reapply for SESTA.
If your child's teacher thinks they may need to work with our learning support team to plan how to meet your child's needs, they can contact us after discussing this with you.
If your circumstances change
If your complaint is about criminal conduct, you may like to consider making a complaint to the NZ Police.
If your financial year was
If your group no longer meets Ministry of Education funding criteria but wishes to continue meeting it may be possible to retain the use of equipment and existing funds. Please discuss this with your Ministry education advisor.
If your highest roll number exceeds your funding roll plus your new entrant adjustment, you can apply for extraordinary roll growth funding.
If your home-based service or individual home-based educator is forced to close in an emergency, other than an infectious disease:
If your home-based service was given Ministry regional office written approval for an emergency closure confirmed by letter or email and you are submitting a paper-based RS7 Return:
If your home-based service was given Ministry regional office written approval for an emergency closure confirmed by letter or email and you are submitting an electronic RS7 Return:
If your initial funding rate is higher due to your attestation response, you may receive a significantly reduced wash-up payment.
If your initial funding rate is lower due to your attestation response, your advance funding may not adequately subsidise the cost of employing your certificated teachers.
If your licence is for children aged 2 and over only, you may fill empty places with children aged 2 or over. You must not fill empty places with children aged under 2.
If your licence is for mixed ages, you may fill empty under 2 places with children of any age. You must not fill empty 2 and over places with children aged under 2.
If your playcentre is funded at the quality rate, you must:
If your playcentre is funded at the standard rate, you must:
If your playgroup has any paid workers, then you will have obligations under the Health & Safety at Work Act 2015 (HSWA). Additional guidance about the HSWA is available for early learning services.
If your school does not use an SMS there are Excel templates to use. You must submit these through our Secure Data Portal.
If your school has been closed by the Minister, you must complete a liquidation statement. We recommend using our model liquidation statement as a template.
If your school has its own servers, you can secure your accounts with these steps:
If your school or kura did not have a person who is paid using the 'S01' designation code, a generic password will be applied to your reports.
If your school uses The New Zealand Curriculum
If your service does not have a dishwasher and you wash dishes by hand, the Ministry of Health recommends you:
If your service generates $10,001-$19,999.99 in ECE Funding Subsidy, 20 Hours ECE funding and Equity Funding payments between 1 June and 31 May, you will be topped up to $20,000.
If your service generates $5,000-$10,000.99 in ECE Funding Subsidy, 20 Hours ECE funding and Equity Funding payments between 1 June and 31 May, you will be topped up to $15,000.
If your service has had a change of service provider, then you should
If your service has joined a larger group of services under a service provider, you may be contacted by the Ministry to confirm the exact service provider name (if this is not obvious from the new bank account).
If your service has previously chosen not to have an EQI calculated, but would now like to, then you should contact the Resourcing Contact Centre on
If your service is a community-based service, for example an incorporated society, a charitable trust, a registered charity, owned by a community organisation, or considered a Public Benefit Entity under XRB requirements, you must provide general purpose financial statements.
If your service is a playcentre
If your service is a private service, for example a partnership, sole trader, or limited liability company, you can choose to provide either general purpose financial statements or a special purpose financial report.
If your service is for under-2s only
If your service is forced to close in an emergency:
If your service is not able to connect to ELI, you must complete the RS61 form.
If your service is to offer 20 Hours ECE, only count your 2-year-olds as 2 and Over hours. Count your 3-year-olds, 4-year-olds and 5- year-olds separately in the 20 Hours ECE hours row. This is necessary so that your 3-year-olds, 4-year-olds and 5-year-olds are not double-counted.
If your service owes money to the Ministry of Education, an invoice will be issued.
If your service was given Ministry regional office written approval for an emergency closure confirmed by letter or email and you are submitting an electronic RS7 Return:
If, however, the caregiver/educator, by contractual agreement, is paid for absent children, the service provider can claim funding for an absent child and the absence rules will apply.
Impairments to Property, Plant and Equipment and Accounts Receivable set off against Assets and Receivables.
Implementation of improved practices as required.
Implementing Government priorities
Implementing the Fakailoga Tino programme to support teachers to name, negotiate and navigate racism so they can better support Pacific learners, parents, families and communities.
Important news for the Ministry of Education
Improved teacher training: Developing the workforce of the future, including leadership development pathways
Improving accountability and transparency for standard setting and approval functions for initial teacher education
Improving education for children and young people with LS needs
In 2018, Targeted Funding is provided for the period 1 January 2018 to 28 February 2019.
In 2018, we had a conversation with
In 2020, we began work to review and identify pay errors for all Ministry-employed and paid staff, including former staff. We worked closely with a specialist payroll consultant and went back as far as March 2010. We agreed these dates with our union partners as we started this work.
In 2021, the Schooling Network Team in National Office worked with a range of regional and national office staff to develop the first
In 2023, there were 14,843
In April 2024, the Minister of Education, Hon Erica Stanford announced 6 priorities for education. One of these priorities is targeting effective learning support interventions for students with additional needs.
In Playcentres, the person responsible must have a recognised qualification as set out in the New Zealand Gazette.
In September 2022, we finished calculating historic holiday pay errors dating back to March 2010 for Ministry employees and completed an independent quality assurance (IQA) process to ensure our calculations and data corrections are correct.
In a dual enrolment situation, funding may be claimed only by the service at which the child was present.
In a few weeks, you will be able to make a submission on the proposals on this Bill through Parliament's website.
In a home-based setting, it is likely that there would be more than one different place that could meet this requirement (bedroom, study, family room, and so on). Deciding on the best place to use in each situation will depend on:
In a home-based setting, this could happen in the home with the children who are there, or at a playgroup that home-based educators may attend.
In a hospital, inappropriate material may also include exposure to frightening or inappropriate sights and sounds connected with medical treatment, equipment and procedures. Without skilled staff and sensitive opportunities to ask questions, express fears, and receive explanations, children can misunderstand what is happening and/or become very anxious.
In a hospital, services use the ECE activity room, which is covered by this criterion, as well as the licensed premises which includes wards and other areas of the hospital. These areas are not the responsibility of the service.
In a particular approach to working with infants, called heuristic play, infants who are old enough to sit up comfortably on their own and reach for objects are given free access to everyday items stored in a container or basket. Adults stay with and watch the infant while they explore, without taking over. Infants can focus for long periods of time, sitting alongside a basket and choosing from a range of materials, exploring their space and texture by mouthing, banging, handling and waving.
In accessing any changing area/table.
In accordance with Schedule 24 of the Education and Training Act 2020, we use National Student Numbers for:
In accordance with Section 548 of the Education and Training Act 2020, eligible services that fail to meet the conditions of funding may no longer be eligible for funding and either all or part of this funding may be recovered by the Ministry of Education as outlined in Chapter 2-7 Recovery of early childhood education funding.
In addition to compliance with HS4 Fire evacuation scheme (above) the centre must have a documented evacuation procedure specifically for the ECE premises. The evacuation procedure required is the responsibility of the service provider.
In addition to that, one thing I wanted to state as well is
In addition to the ECE Funding Subsidy and 20 Hours ECE, services may receive an Annual Top-Up for Isolated Services.
In addition to the required annual plan, services may also have a strategic plan.
In addition to the rules in this handbook, ECE services must also comply with relevant legislation, such as:
In addition to the single PDF file, your school can also upload an Excel spreadsheet version of annual financial statements. This is optional.
In addition to the starter packs sent out earlier this year, kura that submit their data will receive additional printed sets of the resources available online here:
In addition, Home-Based enrolment records for children receiving 20 Hours ECE must also include the Home-based Educator Top Up Payments Agreement section of the Enrolment Agreement Form, completed by the parent/guardian.
In addition, each Playcentre Association is required to send a copy of their audited general purpose financial statements to the Ministry.
In all areas of the ECE activity room, large and heavy items of furniture, equipment and appliances must be secured to the structure of the building. Smaller appliances such as stereos or microwave ovens can be secured with industrial Velcro.
In all areas of the centre, large and heavy items of furniture and equipment and appliances must be secured to the structure of the building, studs are fine, but wallboards may be too weak. Smaller appliances such as stereos or microwave ovens can be secured with industrial Velcro, seismic wax and non-slip mats. More information is available on the Natural Hazards Commission website.
In all areas of the playgroup premises, large and heavy items of furniture and equipment and appliances must be secured to the structure of the building. Smaller appliances such as stereos or microwave ovens can be secured with industrial Velcro.
In all cases, funding can be claimed for all sessions the child was absent from within a 3-week period. The 3-week period begins on the first day of absence.
In an emergency situation, the educator (as the only adult nearby) often needs to deal directly with emergency service personnel when they arrive at the scene. This makes it even more important that there is a safe place for children to wait while the emergency is dealt with. Young children often behave erratically when scared or distressed, and educators need to reduce stress (for themselves, as well as for the children) in these situations as much as possible.
In an emergency situation, the educator (as the only adult nearby) often needs to deal directly with emergency service personnel when they arrive at the scene. This makes it very important to have an evacuation procedure and to have a safe place for children to wait while the emergency is dealt with. For more information see HS5 Safe assembly areas (below).
In an emergency, staff will let you know when you can pick up your child. They will also tell you if they have had to evacuate to a different place. This could be by phone, a sign on the door, text message or on their social media page.
In an evacuation of a hospital-based service all children will be under the management of the medical staff not the play specialist.
In carrying out our statutory functions, we may receive information relevant to our statutory functions from other people or agencies. Any such information is collected in accordance with any relevant statutory powers and in compliance with relevant legislation, information sharing agreements, memoranda of understanding and our internal policies.
In cases where water is stored, a tempering valve can be installed. Refer to criterion PF24 Tempering valve. The water temperature of child accessible taps needs to be checked on every day of operation before children use the tap(s).
In column G, we have pre-set the more common adjustments which you don't need to change.
In decisions around when nappies are changed.
In developing the annual plan services can ask:
In early childhood services in Aotearoa New Zealand, it is important that educators understand the significance of
In essence, you are free to copy, distribute and adapt the material, as long as you attribute it and abide by the other licence terms.
In exceptional circumstances, you may be able to request an exemption to use a different market approach.
In extreme circumstances, drivers can stop the bus to call their employer. They must then follow their service provider's procedures. This may include calling the Police.
In future years, you only have to review and modify the mapping for new codes or delete old codes.
In general children should stay away from an early childhood service when they are ill and causing concern or:
In many cases, children's needs can be met by their school or
In most cases, this requirement will be met by the excursion records required for criterion HS14 (above).
In order to carry out our regulatory compliance function, we may use the information we hold as evidence, as well as for analysis, risk assessment, audit, monitoring, and/or prosecution purposes. In doing so we will comply with our obligations under the Privacy Act 2020.
In order to check that all data for the statement of comprehensive revenue and expense has flowed through correctly from the inputs worksheet, have a look at line 41 under column H to J.
In order to check the statement of changes in net assets and equity, refer to check calculations on line 10 under columns H to J.
In order to meet this criterion services can use a daily check sheet. Any hazards found should be documented and eliminated, isolated or minimised.
In order to receive funding at the standard rate, playcentres must have:
In our example, cell D 205, four thousand five hundred forty-one dollars cash is held on behalf of the Ministry of Education and required to be spent in 2021.
In particular, this statement relates to our regulatory compliance activity that ensures compliance with the Education legislation.
In preparing this information release, the Ministry of Education has considered the public interest considerations in section 9(1) of the Official Information Act.
In sessional services such as Playcentres, adults can use the furniture and fittings within the activity area when the children are not present.
In teacher-led education and care centres and kindergartens, the person responsible may be primary or ECE qualified. In hospital-based and home-based services, only ECE qualified teachers can be a person responsible.
In the education sector, this screening service has been approved for early learning service owner-operators.
In the event of a funding claim audit, funding claimed for absent children who do not have an enrolment agreement will be recovered by the Ministry.
In the event of a funding claim audit, funding claimed for casual or conditional children who did not attend will be recovered by the Ministry.
In the event of a funding claim audit, funding claimed incorrectly will be recovered by the Ministry.
In the event of a major disaster, they should make themselves available to assist, with particular reference to providing support for the emotional wellbeing of children and suitable coping strategies.
In the event of an emergency, hospital play specialists may have a useful role in supporting children who are distressed, and should be prepared with strategies for such situations.
In the event that your SMS provider does not have said
In the home setting where it is likely that children of varying levels of ability and mobility will be together in the same activity space, it is important that infants and toddlers can safely play and explore, both indoors and outdoors.
In the majority of schools, your child can start school on the day they turn 5 years old. That means they don't have to wait until the start of a new school year.
In their communication, the former employees will receive a unique code to use in the claimant management portal where they must complete some verification questions.
In these cases, the Ministry requires additional information to ensure that funding is delivered accurately.
In these cases, the debt or liability will have been outstanding to the Ministry for a period of 30 days or more.
In these cases, the service provider must make sure new educators have some first aid knowledge. They must gain an NZQA-accredited first aid qualification within 4 months of registering with the service. This is a licensing requirement as set out in clause HS22.
In this criterion, supervised means an adult is assigned to oversee children while they are eating to ensure attention is on the children and not on completing other tasks. The adult assigned must be in close proximity to the children who are eating and know how to respond if a child is choking or has an adverse reaction.
In this principle, children are empowered to learn and grow by encouraging and allowing them to make choices and take responsibility for their own learning.
In this section respondents will be
In this session, I'm going to show you how to manually adjust the cash flow for non-cash items, manually add back information on any assets disposed of at a loss, add back information on any assets disposed at a surplus, review the acquisition of assets under a lease or hire purchase security document.
In this situation, services may claim up to 6 hours 20 Hours ECE Funding per eligible child plus up to 6 hours ECE Subsidy Funding per child-place.
In this video I'll be showing you how to import your trial balance, map the trial balance codes to the Ministry of Education codes and then complete the quality assurance necessary to ensure validity of the information.
In this video you will learn how to remap the school's existing links for the latest version of Kiwi Park.
In what ways can educators and coordinators increase the range of experiences to challenge children or extend their learning?
In what ways can parents and
In what ways do our notions of power impact on parents and
In what ways do our notions of power impact on parents sharing their aspirations?
Include a statement about when and where the group meets.
Including emergency plans and procedures as a regular agenda item for meetings between educators and coordinators.
Including emergency plans and procedures as a regular agenda item for meetings.
Including emergency plans and procedures as a regular agenda item for staff meetings.
Increasing school attendance
Independent relief teachers
Indicative operational funding entitlement
Individual Attendance Plans
Individual enrolment agreements
Individuals or community group
Individuals prohibited from being employed or engaged in a core worker role under the workforce restriction can apply for a Core Worker Exemption.
Indoor early childhood education and care centre spaces need to be designed for natural light and consider the visual awareness of the outside environment. Lighting (natural or artificial) should be appropriate to the activities offered or purpose of each room.
Infants are learning to anticipate events, make sense of their worlds and communicate their needs in these early months of life. They learn through touch, sight, sound, smell, and taste in exploration of their everyday environments, and through interactions with adults and other children in environments that are safe yet provide sensory stimulation.
Infants experience one-to-one interactions which are intimate and sociable.
Infants learn by having a variety of safe, everyday objects that stimulate their senses. Play in natural environments or with natural materials (nature), provide rich opportunities for exploring. Warm sun on faces, squishy mud between toes, the smell of mint in the garden! Our senses gather information about the world around us and how it works
Infants must not be placed in a bed as they may roll off the bed.
Infants or other children with special needs who may not be able to drink independently should not be 'propped up' and left unattended as they can move around or slide over which may lead to choking.
Infants or other children with special needs who may not be able to drink independently should not be 'propped up' and left unattended by adults as they can move around or slide over which may lead to choking. Staff ratios should be sufficient for this and providing a comfortable adult sized chair will assist the required one-on-one supervision.
Infants under the age of 6 months and other children unable to drink independently are held semi-upright when being fed. Any infant milk food given to a child under the age of 12 months is of a type approved by the child's parent.
Infants: birth to about 18 months
Inform suppliers of the procurement outcome
Inform the selected supplier that they have been awarded the contract, subject to funding being released.
Information Update: ITE current landscape
Information about changing systems during a funding period can be found at education.govt.nz.
Information about eligibility, the conditions that govern the funding and applying for these funding types can be found in this handbook.
Information about how we manage and protect personal information.
Information about safety around plants in ECE services and which plants to avoid.
Information about the current daily bus and technology bus contracts and our 2-tender procurement approach.
Information about the learner populations from these language communities and current levels of Pacific Languages in Education provision is set out in the supporting evidence brief. It will be important for the Ministry to continue to grow its data about learners and the workforce and providers of Pacific Languages in Education.
Information about the legislation governing our education system and legislative changes affecting schools, kura and early learning services.
Information about the programme, including support and resources for schools,
Information about the reports and advice our ministers have considered
Information about the strategies and policies guiding the work we do.
Information and guidance about your child's learning and development from early learning to school and kura and tertiary education.
Information and guidance are sought from appropriate agencies as required to enable
Information and guidance are sought when necessary from agencies/services to enable adults providing education and care to work effectively with children and their parents.
Information and guidance are sought when necessary, from agencies/services to enable adults providing education and care to work effectively with children and their parents.
Information and guidance is sought when necessary from agencies/services to enable educators and coordinators to work effectively with children and their parents.
Information collected directly
Information collected on this website
Information for a deep dive on education for children
Information is provided to parents about:
Information is shared with the parents and caregivers of children attending, including:
Information is stored and retained in accordance with our Privacy Policy, our Records Management Policy, and our Information Privacy and Security Policy. We also comply with legal obligations about retention and protection of information under the Privacy Act 2020 and the Public Records Act 2005.
Information on 20 hours ECE:
Information on complaints if you have concerns about learning support services.
Information on completing the EC20 transitional advance form is in Section 7-9 of this handbook.
Information on funding claim audits and record keeping audits:
Information on keeping children safe in the sun.
Information on our process to hear and respond to sensitive claims.
Information on successful suppliers is on the New Zealand Government Electronic Tenders Service (GETS):
Information on the required first aid qualifications is available of the first aid page of this website.
Information on the required first aid qualifications is available on the first aid page of this website.
Information or data on a particular subject collected and preserved.
Information or instructions for financial reporting:
Information provided to parents about Ministry funding must be for the individual centre, not consolidated for an association or membership body that has multiple centres.
Information provided to parents about Ministry funding must be for the licensed service, not consolidated for a home-based service provider that has multiple services.
Information received from third parties
Information relevant to all service is identified with [A]. Service type specific information is identified with the following corresponding letter:
Information sharing about vulnerable children
Information sharing for learning support
Information sheet: Prioritised settlements
Information sheet: Rapid payments
Information that supports you to complete other required and recommended actions.
Information to help you meet this criterion
Information to parents and caregivers can be provided in different ways such as parent information sheets, newsletters or on a notice board.
Information to protect from family violence
Information we release proactively, including ministerial advice and responses to requests under the Official Information Act.
Information will also be included in our annual reports for 2024-25 onwards.
Information withheld or refused
Infrastructure Asset Planner
Infrastructure Manager - Asset Planning
Infrastructure Manager - Asset Planning (Acting)
Infrastructure Manager Asset Planning
Infrastructure Manager, Auckland
Infrastructure Manager, Napier
Infrastructure Manager, Southern Region
Infrastructure Manager, Southern region
Infrastructure and property
Initial Teacher Education
Injuries, illnesses and incidents can be a part of early childhood experiences. When a child becomes seriously ill or suffers a serious injury while in the care of the service, services must get medical assistance. This would usually be ringing for an ambulance or taking the child to see a doctor. It is always better to seek medical assistance if you are unsure of the extent of the injury or the seriousness of the illness than to risk the consequences of doing nothing.
Injury and incident procedure flowchart
Inland Revenue is a good starting point for finding out about obligations and entitlements concerning tax.
Inland Revenue legislation, rules and regulations
Inquiry time is no longer available for schools and
Instagram community guidelines
Instructions for completing the RS7 Return can be found in Chapter 9 of this Handbook.
Instructions for the operation of enrolment schemes
Insurance is a specialised topic. Each playgroup will have different insurance requirements and you should seek independent legal advice about yours, particularly for matters relating to public liability. Playgroups can undertake their own risk assessment to guide their insurance decisions. The following questions can be useful starting points for discussion:
Interaction provides a rich social world for children to make sense of and understand.
Interaction provides a rich social world for children to make sense of and understand. Educators provide encouragement, warmth, acceptance, and challenges to help children extend their ideas and understanding of the world.
Interactions with parents give them a sense of belonging and are culturally appropriate.
Internal Environment Monitoring (IEM) devices
Internal Environment Monitoring devices
Internal Environmental Monitors, and
Internal Environmental Quality (IEQ) Design report
Internal Environmental Quality (IEQ) Design report example
Internal evaluation involves asking questions such as:
Internal evaluation is about identifying what is and is not working, and for whom. This is carried out with the aim of improving practice and what is happening for children and then to determine what changes are required.
Internal evaluation is another important way to create opportunities for
Internal evaluation is another important way to create opportunities for educators and coordinators to recognise how well their current practices meet the needs of the learners and highlight areas where educators and coordinators may need to develop their practice.
International student legislation
International students coming to New Zealand
International students on exchanges longer than 3 months require a visa to stay in New Zealand. Contact Immigration New Zealand for more information.
Introduction (including a description of the organisation).
Introduction to Kiwi Park training module video series
Introduction to video series on managing school finances and annual reporting.
Introduction: Kiwi Park training module
Inventory of school systems and recordkeeping
Investigating a complaint or incident
Investigation report template - complaint
Investigation report template - incident
Investigations by other agencies
Investment in a separate account or entity and to accumulate interest or generate profit.
Irritation and redness of eye. Sometimes there is a discharge
Is any fundraising required?
Is any major maintenance work required?
Is it practical or productive for administrative staff to share space with other staff using the space to relax during meal breaks?
Is it sufficient for the numbers and ages of the children?
Is our environment organised for small groups, quiet play or to support the different sensory needs of
Is our environment organised for small groups, quiet play, or to support the different sensory needs of
Is our environment used in purposeful and meaningful ways?
Is the absence approved? Yes, no.
Is the child able to be seen directly by children using the other toilets?
Is the child within view of adjacent areas when the bathroom door is open?
Is the environment arranged in a way that allows choice and opportunities for independence and interdependence?
Is the evaluation process and rationale for the selection of the preferred offer described clearly and fully?
Is the furniture comfortable for adults as well as children?
Is there a minimum time per day or per year that my child has to be enrolled for?
Is there a plan in place to prevent this from happening again?
Is there any, or is that a policy that we have to
Is there anything about the design that offers the child some sense of privacy (for example, a partition or children facing away from the cubicle while handwashing)?
Is there regular opportunity for self-review, internal evaluation, and to set priorities for the year ahead?
Is this different to the ATIS?
Isola Playgroup Philosophy Statement
Isola pre-entry playgroup procedures
Issue-specific information releases
Issues that should be considered when using sleep monitoring technology in addition to the physical checks include:
Issues to consider in developing a hazard and risk identification and management system to ensure hazards are assessed and addressed in an ongoing way are:
It also explains how you can make a complaint about our information-gathering activities, and how you can request information from us.
It also provides the framework for any improvements we make in our continued effort to support schools to manage school property effectively.
It can involve extra language tuition where required. Study should not only involve learning a language.
It does not matter who witnesses the incident. If the service is told of an incident by a visiting adult or parent, this must be documented in the same way as if an educator witnessed the incident.
It enables ECE services to provide early childhood education to 3-year-olds, 4-year-olds and 5-year-olds for up to a maximum of 6 hours per day for 20 hours per week per child without charging fees.
It has to be adapted for those reports.
It is a condition of funding that every service provider of a licensed early childhood service must provide the information listed in this chapter to the Ministry of Education, at the frequency specified, through the ELI system or any alternative method the service provider is authorised by the Ministry to use, to enable the Secretary for Education or the Minister of Education to exercise their powers or carry out their responsibilities under the Act, and as
It is a condition of funding that every service provider of a licensed early childhood service must provide the information listed in this chapter to the Ministry of Education, at the frequency specified, through the ELI system or any alternative method the service provider is authorised by the Ministry to use, to enable the Secretary for Education or the Minister of Education to exercise their powers or carry out their responsibilities under the Act, and as permitted by Privacy Principles 10 and 11.
It is a condition of funding that licensed early childhood services provide information to the Ministry.
It is a good idea to have a policy and process in regard to alcohol and other substances for volunteers, parents and visitors to the playgroup.
It is a good idea to include this requirement in a parent information pack.
It is a good idea to locate the nappy changing area close to a toilet, so that children who are beginning to toilet train can easily use the toilets when they get their nappies changed.
It is a useful record for both parents and medics in the event of a child experiencing an adverse reaction or sudden-onset illness.
It is also quite difficult to tell what has caused the illness and whether or not it is infectious. Familiarity with the information in centre-based Appendix 2 of the criteria on infectious illnesses, incubation periods, symptoms, recommended exclusion times from attending the service and so on will be helpful.
It is an audit of the amount of funding claimed and received by a service.
It is calculated using the data you submit in the SDR.
It is critical that your answers to the attestation questions match the salaries actually paid to your certificated teachers.
It is essential plastic mattress covers are securely attached to mattresses. It is recommended that these waterproof covers are held in place with elastic or other such device. Any ripped mattress covers must be replaced immediately.
It is essential that staff, relievers and volunteers are made familiar with these requirements before commencing work, and are confident in knowing what they are expected to do, both for practice drills and should there be an actual emergency.
It is expected that children in the service can interact freely in the main Pacific language of the service, without direction.
It is good for infants to have the opportunity to experience a range of textures. A range of mixed flooring types may be one way to provide this.
It is good practice for the educator is consultation with the family needs to have a procedure for hygienic preparation of bottles including:
It is illegal to operate any premises as an early childhood education service without a licence.
It is important all mobile children are able to get outside without being dependent on adults.
It is important all mobile children are able to get outside without being dependent on adults. In your planning to meet the easy and safe access by children criterion, the service will need to consider factors such as whether any obstructions and/or health and safety risks can be removed or minimised, or if the adult to child ratio may need to be higher if there are a number of stairs that children must use.
It is important for service providers and educators to have considered in advance the types of situations that might occur in a home-based service and how these would be best handled. This would be an appropriate discussion during an induction process and could include:
It is important for staff to have considered in advance the types of situations that might occur in a hospital-based setting and how these would be handled. For example, staff will need to have considered in advance what they would do in situations such as if a parent or caregiver under the influence of alcohol or any other substance arrives in the activity room.
It is important that ALL injuries, illnesses and incidents are recorded, even if only minor injuries are sustained. This is for 2 reasons:
It is important that children playing outside are safe and not able to leave the home setting unassisted or unnoticed by an adult. The most practical way of keeping children safe is to have unclimbable fences or barriers enclosing the play space. It is recognised that fences in home-based settings will vary in design and height. The materials fences or barriers are constructed with, height and space design, and size should also be considered.
It is important that educators and coordinators develop meaningful and reciprocal relationships with parents and
It is important that nappies are not changed in any part of the building that is used for food preparation.
It is important that the Ministry of Education and education agencies give effect to Ka Hikitia and Tau Mai Te Reo.
It is important that the service assesses and understands the hazards and risks that are relevant to its own unique situation. To start this assessment, see below for a sample list of potential hazards.
It is important that the service provider and educator assesses and understands the hazards and risks and hazards that are relevant to the environment of each home. To start this assessment there is a sample list of potential hazards.
It is important that the space is attractive, interesting and fun, as this will help the children:
It is important that your valuable playgroup equipment is stored safely, especially if you are using a community building. A locked cupboard with shelving inside can be useful if no larger space is available but must be attached to the wall for safety in earthquakes.
It is important to ask for identity documentation, and if a parent/caregiver can provide it, please state in the enrolment form which documentation you sighted.
It is important to engage with
It is important to keep your emergency contact details up to date with your early learning service. Staff need to be able to contact you in an emergency. They also need to know who has permission to pick up your child.
It is important to note that the approved fire evacuation scheme only covers fire emergencies.
It is likely that a large number of specialists will already be working with a child in a hospital-based setting. Before educators approach an additional specialist service, it is important to consult with the parents to ensure that the process is appropriate. Confidentiality issues must always be taken into consideration.
It is not always easy to tell when a child is becoming ill. (A change in behaviour can be one indicator.) It is also quite difficult to tell what has caused the illness and whether or not it is infectious. Familiarity with the information in Appendix 2 of the criteria on infectious illnesses, incubation periods, symptoms, recommended exclusion times from attending the service and so on, will be helpful.
It is possible for services to receive both Component D equity funding and the ATIS.
It is preferable that the art preparation and clean up facility is a separate plumbed-in sink or tub unit that is used exclusively for this purpose.
It is preferable that the art preparation and clean-up facility is a separate plumbed-in sink or tub unit that is used exclusively for this purpose.
It is proposed that Murphys Park Drive will become the new boundary separating the zones of Te Kura Rau Iti and Te Uho o Te Nikau School. Additionally, the East boundary of Te Uho o Te Nikau School is being clarified on the map to accurately reflect the current road layout. This clarification is not intended to change the existing zone but rather to ensure the written description aligns with the actual road network.
It is recommended that ECE services use bleach as a disinfectant when responding to recent outbreaks of diseases caused by micro-organisms (germs) such as giardia, cryptosporidium and salmonella. Many of these germs are resistant to most disinfectants. Bleaches contain sodium hypochlorite, the chemical which kills bacteria and viruses. Bleach used must be at least 2% hypochlorite. Supermarket bleach is labelled between 2 and 5% sodium hypochlorite. Bleach solutions must be made fresh daily to remain effective.
It is recommended that family medications and creams are kept separately from first aid supplies used by the educator in their role.
It is suggested service providers make contact with their territorial local authority at the earliest stage when planning a new centre or renovations to clarify any resource consent requirements.
It is the responsibility of a Service Provider to ensure that any delegated representative who may complete the PITA application understands what attestation conditions their service has met prior to submitting the application.
It is the responsibility of a service provider to ensure that any delegated representative who may complete the
It is the responsibility of a teacher to provide evidence, to the satisfaction of their employer, of any factors used to determine the length of service as an uncertificated teacher in a recognised Pacific immersion or bilingual environment that could be counted as previous relevant work experience.
It is the responsibility of a teacher to provide evidence, to the satisfaction of their employer, to determine the length of service as a certificated teacher in a recognised Pacific immersion or bilingual environment. This could include:
It is the responsibility of the service to ensure new playground equipment is compliant. If the furniture or equipment does not come with proof of compliance, ask the supplier to provide the appropriate evidence.
It is thought that this part of the regulation is rarely 'unpacked' by the Ministry of Education or the sector. There is some anecdotal evidence that it has been interpreted to mean that a dedicated dining room must be provided. This criterion expands on and makes more explicit the requirement to make some provision regarding where children eat while attending the service but does not dictate any particular arrangement.
It is up to a teacher to provide evidence, to the satisfaction of their employer, of any factors used to determine their initial salary step.
It is useful to create some smaller group activity spaces using partitions or shelving and visual dividers with floor coverings to create quiet activity zones away from main foot traffic routes and noise generating activities such as music areas.
It is useful to include phone numbers for key people who can be contacted for information about the playgroup. Make sure this is kept up-to-date and is somewhere easy to find. Make it clear if the phone number is for the playgroup premises or for the key contact people. Think about specifying a time when these people can be contacted.
It is very common for early childhood services to have to deal with children experiencing different forms of illness. Some will be infectious, that is, spread from person to person or from animal to person. Other forms of illness do not spread and will only affect the child or adult who has the illness.
It is very common for early childhood services to have to deal with children experiencing different forms of illness. Some will be infectious, that is, spread from person to person. Other forms of illness do not spread and will only affect the child or adult who has the illness.
It may be more difficult to evacuate children from centres that are not at ground level in the event of a fire. Fire evacuation schemes need to identify ways to mitigate this. We recommend reading High rise evacuation plans for ECE service providers.
It may be more difficult to evacuate children from centres that are not at ground level in the event of a fire. Fire evacuation schemes need to identify ways to mitigate this. We recommend reading the guidance for high rise evacuation plans for ECE service providers
It may be more difficult to evacuate children from centres that are not at ground level in the event of a fire. Fire evacuation schemes need to identify ways to mitigate this. We recommend reading the guidance for high rise evacuation plans for ECE service providers (see HS2 Emergencies, above).
It may be more difficult to evacuate children from homes that are not at ground level in the event of an emergency. Your evacuation procedure will need to identify ways to mitigate this. Additional guidance is available specifically for services above ground level, we recommend you read High rise evacuation plans for ECE service providers.
It may be useful for a service to include all information about sleep in one place such as the sleep procedure which may include aspects such as:
It might be necessary to wash a child:
It must be available on your school website or on request.
It needs to be consistently applied to all users and across all your systems.
It needs to be easy to understand by everyone including families and members of the community and should be clearly displayed.
It seems to be very popular at the moment
It sets clear expectations that school attendance is a priority, and that:
It should be outside of school time, that training.
It states the conditions a service must meet by a certain date. If the conditions are not met, we may cancel its licence to operate.
It summarizes the amount of cash and cash equivalents entering and leaving the school.
It would be beneficial for a service provider to develop clear procedures to make expectations of coordinators and educators clear. The procedure could outline the consequences of inappropriate behaviour. It is good practice to go through this procedure with both coordinators and educators during their induction process and to share this information with parents.
It would be useful to develop a practice of reviewing enrolment and attendance records regularly and filing enrolment records of children who have left or have not attended for a considerable period of time.
It's also important that you check and complete each note if you are required to include information manually.
It's effectively the same as a,
It's great to see a large number
It's only by the end of the term that they need
It's quite a good, it is a good question.
Itchy scalp, especially behind ears
Items (for example cartons, fabric or bottle tops) can be collected at home for use in collage and junk play but be aware of safety. Many natural materials can be collected from beaches and other areas and be used in your group.
Items in first aid kits will need to be replaced as they are used, and regular checks should be made to ensure that any perishable items are not past their use-by date (once a month or term is a good idea). Having a minimum stock list of frequently used items as well as a staff roster for checking your first aid kit(s) will help to ensure perishable items and frequently used items are renewed as needed.
Items in first aid kits will need to be replaced as they are used, and regular checks should be made to ensure that any perishable items are not past their use-by date (once a month or term is recommended). Regular checks are particularly important in the home setting where family members may also be accessing first aid kit items.
Items that should be laundered and how often.
Items to be laundered include but are not limited to:
Items to be laundered include:
Items whose primary purpose is transportation such as slings, backpacks, prams, buggies and car capsules cannot be provided by the centre as an item intended for children to sleep on as they are not intended for that purpose or allow children to lie flat.
Items whose primary purpose is transportation, for example slings, backpacks, prams, buggies and car capsules cannot be provided by the home-based provider or educator as an item intended for children to sleep on as they are not intended for that purpose or allow children to lie flat.
Iwi affiliation (if applicable)
James Cook Kindergarten is a sessional service.
James Cook Kindergarten operates two sessions per day. Session 1 is for 3 hours and session 2 is for 2.5 hours.
Jane Rogers (OAG) presentation.
Jared, does this, uh, can you see the presentation Okay?
Job descriptions are statements written to describe the:
Job descriptions clearly identify the roles and responsibilities of a specific job, helping to promote positive relationships within a team of staff.
Join Hector and friends as they navigate the digital seas and learn valuable lessons about online safety.
Joining the ICT contractors panel
Joining the construction directory
Joining the offsite manufacturing supplier panel
Joining the professional services directory
Journalists wanting information about individuals need to get permission before we can respond to media queries about them. Ask the people in question to complete the privacy consent form, then scan and send it to the media inbox, along with your query.
July funding round: February to May.
June (payment on the first working day in July).
Just a couple of key dates. The draft financial statements have to be given to your auditor in auditable form by the 31st of March and then you must submit your Annual Report to the Ministry by the 31st of May.
K2 - employed to be in charge of a service, and who is not a K3 or K4 employee
K3 - employed to carry out professional support, guidance, and administrative roles, and responsible for the management of K2 employees, under delegation from their employer
K4 - employed to be responsible for the management of K3 employees
Ka Hikitia Measurable Gains Framework
Ka Hikitia is a cross-agency strategy for the education sector.
Ka Hikitia measurable gains framework
Ka Hikitia: Supporting resources for early learning
Ka Hikitia: Supporting resources for schools
Ka Hikitia: Supporting resources for tertiary
Ka Ora, Ka Ako aims to reduce food insecurity by providing a daily nutritious lunch to students in need of the greatest support to help them learn and thrive at school or kura.
Ka Ora, Ka Ako is targeted at the top 25% of students in schools and kura facing the greatest socio-economic barriers. The lunch programme is being extended to up to 10,000 2-to-5-year-olds in early learning services beginning February 2025.
Katy Flintoff (Lower Hutt)
Kaupapa here tiaki tamariki
Keeler, R., (2008). Natural Playscapes: Creating outdoor play environments for the soul. Redmond, WA: Exchange Press.
Keep a record of safety checks
Keep information confidential
Keep records of the process
Keep the approval letter or email for your records.
Keep the dishes separate from each other while they are rinsed, for example on a dish rack.
Keep the emergency drill records for 2 years.
Keep the hazard and risk checklists for the current year and the preceding year.
Keep the immunisation register up to date.
Keep the number of accounts with administrator privileges to a minimum.
Keep the records of food served for 3 months.
Keep the sleep records for the current year plus 1 additional year.
Keep your child home if they are sick
Keep your password secure by:
Keeping Police vet information
Keeping a record of medicine administration demonstrates that the service has fulfilled its duty of care. That the child needing medicine has been given the right dose of the right medicine at the right time.
Keeping a record of sleeping times and checks by adults will ensure that parents have access to important information about their child's sleeping patterns while at the service.
Keeping a record of sleeping times and checks by educators will ensure that parents have access to information about their child's sleeping patterns each day while they are in the care of the educator.
Keeping safe while using school buses
Keeping safe while using the bus
Keeping track of teacher hours
Keeping your personal information secure
Kei te kaiako te kawenga ki te whakarato taunakitanga o ana tohu me ana wheako mahi o mua.
Key Objective 1: Raise the value of Pacific languages.
Key Objective 2: Strengthen pathways and resources to learn Pacific languages and learn through Pacific languages.
Key Objective 3: Create opportunities to use Pacific languages more in more spaces.
Key dates for school staffing and funding
Key investments made in the Budget include an additional:
Key objectives for Targeted Funding.
Key tasks the service intends to undertake
Key to this are strong foundational skills in reading, writing, and maths. These skills allow them to be successful in the broader curriculum learning at school and gain qualifications into further study and employment. This will open doors to fulfilling careers and empower our children to navigate the world confidently.
Keychain (only for iPhones or Google)
Ki runga ki te mata o te whenua
Kindergarten funding is calculated using the same variables as education and care services, with the exception of the Attestation of Certificated Teachers' Salaries. Kindergartens must keep the same records as education and care services. There is a separate funding rate for kindergartens.
Kindergarten teachers, head teachers and senior teachers' collective agreement (KTCA)
Kindergartens are entitled to 80 discretionary hours per funding period, when a certificated reliever is not available. The record-keeping requirements outlined in Section 3-B-2 also apply to kindergartens. This includes the obligation to submit a report to the Ministry on the discretionary hours used each funding period.
Kindergartens that operate a mixture of all-day and sessional must complete the Staff Hour Count for the days that they operate as all-day.
Kindergartens, which are teacher-led centre-based services controlled by a kindergarten association (see Glossary), are treated differently for funding purposes.
Kindergartens, which are teacher-led centre-based services controlled by a kindergarten association [see Glossary], are treated differently for funding purposes.
Kitchen and cooking facilities or appliances are designed, located or fitted with safety devices to ensure that children cannot access them without adult assistance or supervision.
Kitchens and cooking facilities are potentially dangerous places for children so access for children must be supervised.
Kitchens and cooking facilities are potentially dangerous places for children so access for children must be supervised. For this reason, centres need to have the ability to make their kitchen and cooking facilities inaccessible to children.
Kiwi Park group model financial statements
Kiwi Park model financial statements and supporting documents
Kiwi Park model liquidation statement
Kiwi Park training module for schools on how to collate and upload your annual report.
Kiwi Park training module for schools on how to hide Rows and Notes that are not required for your school.
Kiwi Park training module for schools on how to import and map a trial balance.
Kiwi Park training module for schools on how to populate the trial balance converter.
Kiwi Park training module for schools on how to prepare a trial balance for export.
Kiwi Park training module for schools on how to quality check the financial statements.
Kiwi Park training module for schools on how to quality review the Statement of Cash Flows.
Kiwi Park training modules
Kowhai St. Childcare Centre records the daily number of Certificated Teacher Hours and Other Teacher Hours on their Staff Record.
Kowhai St. provides its RS7 Return to the Ministry of Education.
Kowhai St. transfers the daily Certificated Teacher Hours and Other Teacher Hours for the funding period from their Staff Record to the Staff Hour Count section of their RS7 Return.
Kowhai Street Childcare Centre completes their July RS7 Return with their Certificated Teacher Hours and regulated (ratio) staff hours for February, March, April, and May.
Kowhai Street Childcare Centre completes their March RS7 Return with their Certificated Teacher Hours and regulated (ratio) staff hours for October, November, December and January.
Kowhai Street Childcare Centre completes their November RS7 Return with their Certificated Teacher Hours and regulated (ratio) staff hours for June, July, August and September.
Kowhai Street Childcare Centre is an all-day service.
Kowhai Street Childcare Centre operates all-day on Monday, Wednesday and Friday, and Tuesday and Thursday as sessional. They claim 12 days in the all-day column, and 9 days in the sessional column.
Kowhai Street attests that all of their employed certificated teachers are being paid at least the amount specified at Step 1 to 11 + Management
Kowhai Street attests that all of their employed certificated teachers are being paid at least the amount specified at Step 1 to 6.
Kowhai Street attests that all of their employed certificated teachers are being paid at least the amount specified at Step 1.
Kowhai Street attests that all of their employed certificated teachers are being paid at least the amount specified in Full Parity Salary Scale (Full Step 1 to 11 + Full Management Steps).
Kowhai Street is placed on the 50-79% base funding rate.
Kristen is enrolled to attend an early childhood service 5 days a week.
Kristen was absent for more than half of the Fridays in August.
Kura must use this funding to provide school transport assistance to all eligible
Kura receive a daily amount for each eligible
LM Consulting (24 hours, 7 days a week)
Laminated safety glass or toughened safety glass is much stronger than ordinary glass and breaks less easily. When it does break, it does not splinter into sharp jagged pieces. This greatly reduces the risk of injury.
Land Use Grants revenues is set off against property expenses.
Language consists of words, sentences and stories, languages of sign, mathematics, visual imagery, art, dance and drama, rhythm, music, and movement. For children who are non-verbal, alternative and augmentative communication (ACC) technology and devices can be used to replace or augment verbal communication.
Language consists of words, sentences and stories, languages of sign, mathematics, visual imagery, art, dance and drama, rhythm, music, and movement. For children who are non-verbal, alternative and augmentative communication (ACC) technology and devices can be used to replace or augment verbal communication. Mokopuna are encouraged to engage with different forms of expression in ways that they find meaningful and enjoyable.
Language is a vital part of communication and cultural transmission. If children are competent communicators, they are well-placed to enjoy their relationships with others and to be successful learners.
Language is a vital part of communication and cultural transmission. If children are competent communicators, they are well-placed to enjoy their relationships with others and to be successful learners. Language does not consist only of words, sentences, and stories though: it includes the language of images, art, dance, drama, mathematics, technology, movement, rhythm, print and music.
Language planning support
Language planning supports stronger and consistent language development across an entire education service.
Language/s spoken at home.
Large easy-to-clean mats spread on the floor or on the grass, benches and the edges of low decks are also practical ways of providing places for children to sit and eat.
Large print summary (long version)
Large print summary (short version)
Last year, the Ministry for Regulation (MfR) led an ECE Regulatory Review.
Lastly, the initial step should be further advanced if the teacher also has other relevant work experience, such as unqualified or overseas teaching. Other relevant experience must be within the last 10 years and is up to a maximum of 2 steps.
Late submissions may result in late or no payment.
Later commencement date for
Laws and regulations for early learning services
Laws and regulations for early learning services.
Laws governing early learning
Learn about how to support children at playgroup.
Learn about official information and making requests under the Official Information Act 1982.
Learn about our OIA responsibilities when responding to requests from the media.
Learn about our established property supplier panels and how you can join one.
Learn about our role and who we are, New Zealand's education system, and how to contact us.
Learn about the Required, Recommended, and Inform compliance levels used on our site.
Learn about the characteristics of infants, toddlers and young children.
Learn about the compliance levels used on our site.
Learn about the education and care available for your tamariki before they go to school or kura.
Learn about the education, training and career options to support your young person when they leave school.
Learn about your child's education at primary and secondary school.
Learn how to create a bus procedure for your school in our training module for bus controllers.
Learn how to enrol your child in an early learning service, how their settling in process might work, and what to bring on the first day.
Learn more about how we investigate complaints and incidents.
Learn what roles there are in our procurement process and who they are usually assigned to.
Learn what steps we can take if a licenced early learning service does not comply with licencing criteria or other legal requirements.
Learn where to install Internal Environment Monitoring devices (IEMs) at school, how to read the data and what to do if you have a problem.
Learner Identity Broker privacy impact assessment - Full report
Learner Identity Broker privacy statement
Learner Identity Broker privacy statement for students
Learning Support Action Plan
Learning and using your language creates a greater sense of belonging, a strong sense of identity and makes you feel safe and valued in your place of learning
Learning experiences and play opportunities
Learning opportunities and experiences
Learning support Action Plan
Learning support exemptions
Learning support for literacy and communication
Learning support information about children and young people may need to be shared in groups.
Learning support request form
Learning support request form [DOCX, 71KB]
Learning support request form for Canterbury, Chatham Islands
Learning support request form for South Canterbury
Learning support resources for parents
Learning support service complaints
Learning support services
Learning support services in the regions
Least privilege for IT leads and administrators
Least privilege reduces the risk of accidental or intentional misuse of information. It can:
Leave and holidays - Employment New Zealand
Leave the totals line so that you have a mechanism to check if you agree with your school's totals.
Leaving Teacher Destination (permanent staff only).
Legal requirements for school attendance
Legal requirements for schools that run their own services
Legislative requirements for consultation are located in Section 5 of the Education and Training Act 2020:
Length of service progression
Leo o Fanau Moana bilingual
Leo o Fanau Moana bilingual (51% to 80% bilingual):
Leo o Fanau Moana immersion
Leo o Fanau Moana immersion (81% to 100% immersion):
Leo o fanau moana bilingual
Leo o fanau moana immersion
Lessening the likelihood of a prone or crawling infant, or a toddler just beginning to find their feet, being accidentally injured by an older child who is fully engaged in their own play and is not aware of their presence.
Level 1 are immersion education settings where
Licence changes are permitted under the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008.
Licence-exempt and certificated playgroups now need to meet the same funding rules and requirements to be eligible for funding. Differences in the amount of funding available to Licence-exempt and certificated playgroups remain in recognition of the quality assurance provided by the certification process.
Licences are issued to early childhood education services under the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008.
Licences set the standards for curriculum, premises and facilities, health and safety, and governance and management of early childhood services.
Licensed ECE services are eligible for funding under this component if they provide early childhood education in a language and culture other than English (including sign language) during more than half of the formal education and care programme.
Licensed ECE services receiving the ECE Funding Subsidy must meet certain eligibility and funding conditions.
Licensed ECE services that meet the criteria outlined in this chapter are eligible.
Licensed ECE services with an EQI of 1, 2, 3 or 4 are eligible to receive Component A Equity Funding.
Licensed ECE services with an EQI of 1, 2, 3 or 4 are eligible to receive funding under Component B: Special needs and non-English speaking backgrounds.
Licensed ECE services with an Isolation Index of 1.65 or greater qualify to receive funding.
Licensed and certificated services
Licensed early childhood education services and certified playgroups must follow the national gazetted curriculum framework for early childhood education,
Licensed early childhood services must confirm the accuracy and completeness of their ELI records by the end of the following month.
Licensed early childhood services must send information to the ELI system through ELI Web, or a Ministry-approved commercial student management system (SMS).
Licensed early childhood services must submit ECE Census information once per year. The collection date is notified by the Ministry.
Licensed early childhood services, unless specifically exempt, must send complete and accurate information to the ELI system. This includes:
Licensed early learning services (except
Licensed early learning services are required to have regard to the NELP as part of the Governance, Management and Administration (GMA) requirements.
Licensed early learning services have to meet health and safety criteria set by us and other agencies.
Licensed early learning services must meet specified ratio requirements. The ratio depends on the age of the children and type of service.
Licensed early learning services receive government funding, but usually there is an additional cost for
Licensed early learning services that meet the criteria outlined in this chapter are eligible to receive Targeted Funding.
Licensed early learning services which serve
Licensed home-based services must meet the requirements specified in the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008 and the Licensing Criteria for home-based ECE services.
Licensed private and community-based services with an Isolation Index of 1.65 or greater which receive less than $20,000 per annum in ECE Funding Subsidy, 20 Hours ECE and Equity Funding are eligible to receive the ATIS (see Section 5-1 for more details).
Licensed services receiving the ECE Funding Subsidy must meet these conditions at all times.
Licensing Criteria for Centre-based ECE Services 2008
Licensing Criteria for Home-based ECE Services 2008
Licensing Criteria for Hospital-based ECE Services 2008
Licensing and certification
Licensing criteria are used to assess how centres meet the minimum standards set out in the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008.
Licensing criteria assess if centre-based ECE services meet minimum standards set by the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008 to retain their licence.
Licensing criteria assess if home-based ECE services meet minimum standards set by the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008 to retain their licence.
Licensing criteria assess if hospital-based ECE services meet minimum standards set by the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008 to retain their licence.
Licensing criteria for centre-based ECE services
Licensing criteria for centre-based early learning services
Licensing criteria for centre-based education and care services
Licensing criteria for home-based ECE services
Licensing criteria for home-based education and care services
Licensing criteria for hospital-based ECE services
Licensing criteria for hospital-based education and care services
Lifting the quality of New Zealand's physical learning environments.
Lighter things such as books and blocks can also cause injury if they fall on children.
Lighter things such as books and blocks can also cause injury if they fall on children. These can be held on shelves by a wire or short chain connected to the shelf with a metal eye or hook.
Lighter things such as books and blocks can also cause injury if they fall on children. These can be held on shelves by wire or a short chain connected to the shelf with a metal eye or hook.
Lighter things such as books and blocks can also cause injury if they fall on children. These can be held on shelves by wire, or a short chain connected to the shelf with a metal eye or hook.
Like I said, that gives greater effect to, to greater effect
Limit the number of administrators
Limitation policy for claims of abuse in state care
Limitation policy for historic claims of abuse in state-care
Limits of exemption - general
Limits of exemption - three-week rule
Line of sight from the door
Line of sight from those using bathroom facilities
Linen must be removed from the mattresses and not stacked in between mattresses.
Linen used by children or adults is hygienically laundered.
Link between staff hour count and funding rate
LinkedIn (Ministry of Education of New Zealand)
Links from other sites to this one
Links to other websites from this one should not be taken as endorsement of those sites or of products offered on those sites. When visiting other websites, refer to the conditions of use and copyright policies of those sites.
Links to third-party websites
Liquid soap (rather than a communal bar of soap) can be less messy and is more hygienic when there are several children attending.
Liquid soap (rather than a communal bar of soap) can be less messy and is more hygienic.
List of all school board members [OPTIONAL].
List of daily and technology school bus providers
List of potential hazards
List of services in the scheme
List the daily number of hours of enrolment for each enrolled child eligible for 20 Hours ECE.
List the daily number of hours of enrolment for each permanently enrolled child under 2 years of age.
List the number of discretionary hours (or parts thereof) that have been used to cover the absence of each certificated teacher for the day.
List the number of hours that can be claimed for each child.
Listen to Minister Kelvin Davis talk about Ka Hikitia and Tau Mai
Live animals (insects, frogs, spiders, and so on) should be observed with care and returned to their natural environment as soon as possible.
Lockable castors should be used to prevent trolleys or shelving on wheels from moving around. Think about weight distribution on free standing shelves, that is, store heavy items at the bottom of shelving with lighter items higher up.
Lockable castors should be used to prevent trolleys or shelving on wheels from moving around. Think about weight distribution on free standing shelves.
Lockdown drills should be practiced by educators without children. Drills on what to do in potentially violent situations can be practiced, but at a time that children are not on site as the drills may cause undue fear and anxiety. However, educators should be aware of procedures and able to carry the procedures out if the service has been alerted to an immediate threat. Practices for lockdown drills should be recorded and kept as per other drills.
Lockdown drills should be practiced by staff without children. Drills on what to do in potentially violent situations can be practiced, but at a time that children are not on site as the drills may cause undue fear and anxiety. Especially if the drill involves everyone sheltering in a darkened space such as a sleep room. However, staff should be aware of procedures and able to carry the procedures out if the service has been alerted to an immediate threat. Practices for lockdown drills should be recorded and kept as per other drills.
Log in to Netsafe's Kete for further guidance that may be useful.
Log the time and date of when the record was verified.
Login and support queries for schools and tertiary applications:
Long-term insights briefings
Long-term insights briefings are a statutory requirement under the Public Service Act 2020.
Longer term planning signals our direction to the wider community, including:
Look at Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008 regulation 47 and licensing criterion GMA7 for what is required.
Look at how many children are already permanently enrolled to attend your service when it opens.
Looking at what teachers need to teach in Pacific bilingual education.
Looking forward to rolling these out
Low achievement at school in literacy, numeracy, oral language and other subjects.
MA1 Statement of operation
MPI website is useful for anyone handling food.
Main office number (24 hours, 7 days a week)
Main office number (Office hours: 8am-5pm, Monday-Friday)
Maintaining a list of allergies for children at the home, and ready access to the list and relevant medications in the event of an allergic reaction.
Maintaining a list of allergies for children attending the centre, and ready access to the list and relevant medications in the event of an allergic reaction.
Major investment in teacher supply
Major works contract template
Make a notification of a child's serious injury or illness if it:
Make sure each parent knows which children they are responsible for. Give them a list of names.
Make sure that any sores and weeping cuts, spots and scratches are covered at all times in all environments, and encourage children not to scratch or pick at them. If these wounds cannot be covered, the child or staff member should stay at home until they have healed.
Make sure that staff wear gloves and use disinfectant to clean up spills, or blood or other body fluids.
Make sure that the fastenings used are strong enough to hold the weight of the heavy object. What will happen if it gets bounced up/down?
Make sure that the fastenings you use are strong enough to hold the weight of the heavy object. What will happen if it gets bounced up and down?
Make sure that the fastenings you use are strong enough to hold the weight of the heavy object. What will happen if it gets bounced up/down?
Make sure that you can check off each of the items below before you submit the annual report to us. Details of what your report should cover for each of these items are in the annual report template.
Make sure the NAS is up to date with any software updates.
Make sure they are aware of the itinerary, timetable and general logistics of the excursion.
Making a complaint about an investigation
Making an official information request
Making sense of what is happening
Making sure your claim is in the right place
Management and administration
Management and administration criteria for playgroups.
Management and administration information about closing a playgroup.
Management positions may be held by:
Management staffing has a roll generated component and either:
Managing behaviour on school bus services
Managing noise levels will benefit everyone at the service. Establish expectations with children about what is an acceptable level of noise inside.
Managing noise levels will benefit everyone in the home. Establish expectations with children about what is an acceptable level of noise inside.
Managing staffing usage (banking staffing)
Managing student behaviour on school transport
Many children go to a school close to where they live. Many schools have an enrolment scheme called zoning.
Many items in ECE centres need prompt, regular washing. This should include bedding as well as towels, cloths, bibs and dress ups.
Many items in a home-based setting need prompt, regular washing. This should include bedding as well as towels, cloths, bibs and dress ups.
Many services develop regular reporting processes including providing an annual report. Often monthly financial reports are made available. This is a good way to provide information to parents on a regular basis.
Map of attendance services 2024
March funding round: October to January.
March to May: The auditor provides the audited financial statements to the board.
Marketing and promotional activities/resources.
Marlborough Kindergarten Association
Material on this website is licensed for re-use under the Creative Commons Attribution
Materials to help implement
Maths Professional Learning and Development
Maths resources clarification
Mats are useful because they can be removed for cleaning and can be moved within the centre to reorganise the learning environment from time to time. There are some very effective semi-permanent tapes that attach a mat to the floor. This helps to ensure mats do not become a hazard.
Matters regarding remuneration over and above base salary are to be discussed between the teacher and their employer.
Mattresses must have a surface that is smooth, easily cleaned and impervious to moisture and does not present a suffocation hazard to children. The waterproof layer must cover at least the whole of the upper surface and all sides of the mattress.
Mattresses need to fit firmly inside the cot to avoid gaps that an infant could get wedged in. Mattresses should not be too soft, as this is a risk factor for infant suffocation.
Mattresses need to fit firmly inside the multi-level cot to avoid gaps that an infant could get wedged in. Mattresses should not be too soft, as this is a risk factor for infant suffocation.
Maungawhau (Mt Eden) office
Maximum (M) salary step for that qualification group.
Maximum FCHs for the ECE Funding Subsidy
Maximum child age taught (months).
May be consolidated (i.e. one report covering all services)
May be consolidated (i.e. one statement of accounting policies covering all services)
McKenzie Residential School and Campbell Park School
Measured by Equity Index (EQI).
Measured by Isolation Index.
Measured by attestation (EC15 form).
Measurement of eligibility
Mechanisms for notification
Media privacy consent form
Medical certificate to support application for exemption from absence rule for special and/or health needs.
Medicine (prescription and non-prescription) is not given to a child unless it is given by authorised personnel, in an emergency or as part of the child's treatment as a patient of the hospital.
Medicine (prescription and non-prescription) is not given to a child unless it is given:
Medicines are stored safely and appropriately, and are disposed of, or sent home with a parent (if supplied in relation to a specific child) after the specified time.
Medicines must be stored out of the reach of children, but still be easily accessed by an adult if needed in an emergency. Some medicines may require refrigerated storage.
Medicines must be stored out of the reach of children, but still be easily accessed by the educator if needed in an emergency. Some medicines may require refrigerated storage. Services must ensure that children do not have unsupervised access to the kitchen or the fridge.
Medium works contract template
Melanie attends 4 hours per day, Monday to Friday.
Melanie is receiving 20 Hours ECE and is enrolled for five hours on Monday to Friday, from 8am to 1pm.
Micronesian not further defined
Microsoft Windows 10 or later, which may have Windows Hello to scan your face or fingerprint.
Microsoft has default security settings that includes multifactor authentication and guidance on how to use 2FA for email.
Middle management allowances for secondary and composite schools
Middle management allowances may be allocated:
Minimising physical restraint in schools
Minimising student distress in schools
Minimum adult to child ratios and first aid
Minimum child age taught (months).
Minimum number of teachers responsible for supervision of sleeping children.
Minimum salary scale for certificated teachers
Minimum salary scale for management positions
Minimum salary scales and salary progression
Minimum salary scales before 1 November 2023
Minimum salary scales from 1 November 2023
Minimum salary steps and employer Kiwisaver contributions
Minimum submission frequency
Minister Reti's media releases
Minister Seymour announced today that the Government accepted all 15 recommendations from the review report.
Minister Seymour's media releases
Minister Simmonds' media releases
Minister Stanford's media releases
Minister's release on the attendance action plan - Beehive website
Ministers' media releases on the Beehive website
Ministry auditors must be provided access to hospital records for verification purposes.
Ministry of Education Customer Services
Ministry of Education child protection policy
Ministry of Education policies including Child Protection Policy and protected disclosures.
Ministry of Education staff are free to use social media in their personal lives. The opinions or views they expressed are their own, not ours.
Ministry of Education staff.
Ministry of Education's Bullying Free NZ website
Ministry of Education. Quality in Action
Ministry staff will engage in conversations with services about how they may show they have regard for the NELP. For example, some services may be due to update their annual plan so it could be as simple as including the NELP in this. Services could look at how the NELP can be woven into their self-review and internal evaluation processes and systems as well as professional growth cycles.
Ministry-funded resources (Years 0 to 8)
Minor works contract guidance
Minor works contract template
Missing a week of school each term means missing a whole year of learning by the time your child is 16. Regularly attending school helps students to get the most out of their education.
Mixed and all-day kindergartens
MoE Design features report - template
Moana Valley Preschool had 9 Certificated Teacher Hours for 1 September.
Mod Com Portable Buildings Limited
Monday 12 October to no later than Friday 18 December 2026 (up to 98 half days).
Monday 14 July to Friday 19 September 2025 (100 half days).
Monday 14 October to no later than Friday 20 December 2024 (up to 98 half days).
Monday 15 September 2025: Provisional roll review applications open.
Monday 20 April to Friday 3 July 2026 (106 half days).
Monday 20 July to Friday 25 September 2026 (100 half days).
Monday 22 July to Friday 27 September 2024 (100 half days)
Monday 28 April to Friday 27 June 2025 (86 half days).
Monday 29 April to Friday 5 July 2024 (96 half days).
Monday 3 November 2025: Extraordinary roll growth applications open.
Monday 5 January 2026: Quarter 1 operational funding 2026 instalment paid.
Monday 6 October to no later than Friday 19 December 2025 (up to 108 half days).
Monday 7 April 2025: EOY Banking staffing letters published on secure data portal.
Monday 8 September 2025: September roll return due.
Monitor and review hazard and risk management system and practices.
Monitoring and maintaining the right levels of access
Monitoring progress: children receiving 20 Hours ECE
Monitoring progress: children receiving 20 Hours ECE (removed April 2015): 9-9
Monitoring progress: teacher registration targets
Monitoring progress: teacher registration targets (removed April 2015): 9-8
Monitoring will include checking for warmth, breathing, general wellbeing every 5 to 10 minutes or more frequently according to the needs of the child. This will be recorded along with the time of the check and the name of the adult checking.
Monthly data is required to be inputted and confirmed as correct by the end of the following month.
More about enrolment schemes
More detailed information is available on Ventilation in early learning services.
More guidance on developing a complaints policy and process is available, which includes a suggested template for developing a complaints policy and procedure.
More home-based regulatory guidance
More information about ELI can be found on this website.
More information about copyright:
More information about noise is available in the licensing criteria guidance: PF12 Lighting, ventilation, heating and acoustic materials.
More information about noise is in the licensing criteria guidance for HS15 Noise levels.
More information can be found in the resource
More information can be found in the resource:
More information can be found on the equity funding page.
More information for all services on the rates and applying for funding is available in the following sections:
More information for schools
More information is available from the NZ Transport Agency website.
More information is available in the guidance for HS6 Securing furniture.
More information is available in the publication Caring for animals: a guide for teachers, early childhood educators and students.
More information is available on the NZ Transport Agency website.
More information is available on the Police vetting page.
More information on childcare assistance can be found on the Work and Income website or call
More information on each of these funding types can be found in the following chapters:
More information on equipment in ECE centres.
More information on philosophy statements can be found in the Ministry of Education's guide for starting a centre-based ECE service.
More information on risk management
More information on the requirements of the Food Act and Food Regulations is available on the Food Act section of this website.
More options for complaints
More record keeping information
More regulatory guidance for home-based ECE services.
More teacher guidance for accelerating literacy learning in Years 4 to 6 and 7 to 8 will be available later this year.
More than 2,000 learners,
Most children stay at school until they are around 17 years old.
Most of the information we collect is provided directly by people or organisations, or their authorised representative, in order to meet their statutory obligations and according to our powers as a regulator.
Most scholarships will have an application deadlines and documents you need to submit. You may need to supply personal documents such as:
Most school buses are managed by the Ministry of Education, but some schools are funded to organise their own transport services.
Most schools in New Zealand are owned and funded by the state (state schools). They teach the national curriculum and are secular (non-religious).
Most schools, and teachers, do not use physical restraint on students. For the schools that use physical restraint, this should be used only as a very last resort needed to prevent students from imminent harm. The compulsory online module helps clarify the difference between appropriate physical contact and restraint.
Most staff do not need to do physical holds and releases training.
Moving over the face of the land
Multi-level cots (also known as bunk cots or stacker cots) are those where (usually) 2 cots are fixed on top of each other.
Multi-level cots are only acceptable if the following can be assured:
Multi-level cots must have no gaps or protrusions that could trap an infant or catch their clothing and have no sharp edges. The sides must be high enough to stop an infant climbing out and there should be no footholds.
Multi-level cots must only be able to be opened from the outside by an adult to place a child in or remove a child.
Multi-level cots, bunk cots and stacker cots
Multiple Barrier Allowance
Museum, Art Gallery, Zoo education officers.
Must be itemised by service
My understanding is that you are to use the question mark
NSNs are allocated and stored in the National Student Index (NSI).
NZ Government Business.govt.nz website carries a range of resources and tools for employers covering recruiting, appointing and managing staff.
NZ Transport Agency index data and processes to calculate any adjustments.
NZ Transport Agency requirements
NZ has car restraint guidance you can share with
NZQA has guidance on AI and when its use is acceptable in assessment.
NZTA determines the loading limit for every passenger service vehicle, including the number of standing passengers.
Napier Free Kindergarten Association Incorporated
Nappy change facilities should be located in an area of the home that is separate from food preparation or eating areas.
Nappy changing areas should be cleaned and disinfected after every nappy change.
Nappy changing procedures at early learning services
Nappy changing surfaces should be cleaned and disinfected after every nappy change.
Nappy changing/disposal procedure
National Certificate of Educational Achievement
National Education Growth Plan
National Education Growth Plan 2030
National Education Schooling Network Methodology
National Education and Learning Priorities
National Emergency Management Agency
National Monitoring Study for Student Achievement (NMSSA) Year 8
National Student Number (NSN).
National Student Numbers for tertiary providers
National Trust Board and the Ministry of Education signed
National Trust Board and the Ministry of Education.
National Trust Board. The trust and the
National Trust and licensed by the Ministry of Education under the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008.
National Trust who will advise the Ministry of Education at the same time.
National Trust, the service provider will seek information and guidance from
Nau mai, haere atu taku karere
Nausea, diarrhoea and/or vomiting
Nausea, stomach pains, general sickness with jaundice (yellow skin) appearing a few days later
Nelson District Free Kindergarten Association
Nelson, Marlborough, West Coast
Nelson, Marlborough, West Coast, Canterbury, Chatham Islands, Otago, Southland:
Netsafe has a range of resources for educators and parents
Netsafe has developed acceptable use policy templates for ECE Services, and parents or caregivers. The templates may be downloaded from Netsafe.
Netsafe has developed acceptable use policy templates for schools and
Netsafe's website offers help to prevent cyberbullying. Netsafe can also help with reporting abuse online and bullying on mobile phones.
Network for Learning (N4L)
Network for Learning (N4L) if the password is to N4L services
Network for Learning (N4L) is a Crown company that helps connect, protect and support schools and kura across Aotearoa New Zealand through a wide range of managed internet, Wi-Fi and cyber security products and services. N4L is committed to improving digital learning experiences and outcomes for all.
Never enter your actual password when testing the strength of it. Only use it to understand how to improve your passwords or passphrases.
New Ready to Read Phonics Plus cards available
New Zealand (Teaching Council) is responsible for Police vetting registered teachers, principals and relief teachers. This is part of the process to hold a practicing certificate or Limited Authority to Teach (LAT).
New Zealand Educational Institute (NZEI)
New Zealand Legislation website
New Zealand Qualifications Authority
New Zealand Qualifications Authority (NZQA)
New Zealand Qualifications Authority (NZQA) must assess overseas qualifications.
New Zealand Relay is a free service that helps people who are:
New Zealand School Trustees Association.
New Zealand Sign Language (NZSL) Tutors
New Zealand Sign Language video for the summary of the Action Plan for Pacific Education 2020-2030 (2023 refresh)
New Zealand Transport Agency requirements.
New Zealand Transport Authority has guidance for schools and families about bus safety.
New Zealand and the children in the group.
New Zealand citizens overseas and corporate bodies with a place of business in New Zealand can also request information.
New Zealand culture. Early childhood services are a vital link to ensuring all New Zealand children, regardless of ethnicity, are given the opportunity to learn about and experience, in a very real way, both
New Zealand in certain circumstances. The Teaching Council has information and guidance on how to embed the Code and Standards further into your teaching practice, and how to identify breaches of the code using a number of scenarios in their Resource Centre.
New Zealand is the professional body for New Zealand teachers.
New Zealand students on an exchange
New Zealand that provide a holistic description of what high quality teaching practice looks like and what it means to be a teacher in
New Zealand's Network of Schools
New Zealand, Tertiary Education Commission, and New Zealand School Trustees Association (NZSTA). The education sector includes all early learning, schooling, and tertiary education provision.
New Zealand, it is important that
New Zealand-German Student Exchange
New Zealand-Germany Exchange
New and existing employees
New closing for instruction settings
New daily bus and technology bus contracts began in Term 1 2022.
New early learning service types introduced
New services are eligible for funding from the day that they are licensed and operating.
New services must complete the RS3 Form to receive their first ECE Funding Subsidy entitlement.
New services must complete this form to receive their first funding payment.
New services or services considering renovations should be aware of the requirements of the New Zealand Building Code.
New services that are affiliated to, or located on the grounds of, a state or integrated school must ensure they are a separate legal entity, and have a separate management structure and bank account to that of the school.
New services/owners that have not completed a full financial year of operation do not have to provide audited financial reports.
Newly installed playground equipment or safety surfacing must have a certificate of compliance to show it is installed according to the manufacturer's instructions. These may be asked for during the licence assessment process.
News and information for Pacific families and caregivers with kids in education.
News, guidance and resources for education professionals working in schools and kura.
News, guidance and resources for service providers, contractors and suppliers working with schools, kura, and early learning services.
Next select View, Arrange All, Vertical.
Next, copy the exported file to the folder where you have saved the Kiwi Park model. Rename the file to something more appropriate for future reference and audit purposes.
Niche Modular Construction Limited
No Salary Scale (No Step).
No Salary Scale (No step)
No Salary Scale (No step).
No alcohol is to be consumed on the premises when children are present.
No funding may be claimed for any continuous absences from the 13
No money was paid to the school. This resulted in a loss on disposal of $3,257.
No person on the premises smokes or vapes in any area which is available for use by children or for food preparation while children are attending the service.
No person on the premises smokes or vapes in any area which is available for use by children or for food preparation while children are present.
No person on the premises uses, or is under the influence of, alcohol or any other substance that has a detrimental effect on their functioning or behaviour during the service's hours of operation.
No step: 0-24% base funding band.
No, I think that's exactly right, Jared.
No, it doesn't have to be changed
Noise levels can be reduced indoors by good acoustic design and materials.
Non-teaching staff who are bus controllers must fill in the NOVO13nt timesheet.
None, but ECC/school should be informed. Treatment recommended to kill eggs and lice.
None, but skin contact should be avoided
Northern Auckland Free Kindergarten Association Incorporated
Northland Kindergarten Association
Not all children in the service are expected to interact in the main Pacific language of the service, however, will do so when directed.
Not all early learning services will have spaces available so you might need to go on a waiting list.
Not all school buses have to have seatbelts. But if there are seatbelts, they should be used.
Not all schools have zones. Anyone can enrol at schools that don't have an enrolment scheme. If your child is enrolled at a school without an enrolment scheme, they are entitled to remain at the school if an enrolment scheme is brought in.
Not all schools use cohort entry, so you'll need to check with the school when you enrol your child about when they can start.
Not all syllabuses are available to home-educated students. You will need to contact the school of your choice and organise the exams through them and pay a fee if your child is accepted.
Not only to have proactive informed conversations
Not usually, but there is a provision for a charge to be made.
Note that some of the findings we have made might be upsetting to read about.
Note that the due date for the Targeted Funding report is different to the due date for general and special purpose financial reports.
Note that this licence does not apply to:
Note: A session of 2.5 hours will receive funding for 3 hours.
Note: Emergency closure approval request older than one calendar month will not be approved.
Note: Exclude 3-year-olds, 4-year-olds and 5-year-olds that will be receiving 20 Hours ECE at your service.
Note: For the November 2023 funding round the attestation period for funding conditions related to Full Parity Salary Scale Steps 1 to 11 + Full Management steps start from November 2023.
Note: Funding conditions for licensed home-based services previous to 1 January 2025 are available for reference in Appendix 5.
Note: Funding conditions for licensed home-based services previous to 1 January 2025 are available for reference on the ECE Funding Handbook updates page.
Note: Funding conditions related to the Full Parity Salary Scale are effective from 1 November 2023.
Note: Home-based service providers must try to place the enrolled child/ren with another educator before applying for emergency closure approval.
Note: In exceptional circumstances, in isolated communities, (3) may be waived by the Ministry regional office.
Note: It is important to use real, well maintained, adult tools that work properly when children use them.
Note: Regulation 28(2)(c) must be read alongside other regulations and licensing criteria that further describe a service's or person responsible/s responsibilities. Regulations to note:
Note: Services completing a paper-based RS7 Return must complete and sign the forms in pen. Pencil must not be used. Completed RS7 Returns should be sent:
Note: The Base Salary Scale is only effective from 1 November 2023.
Note: The Extended Parity Salary Scale is only effective from 1 November 2023.
Note: The Full Parity Salary Scale is only effective from 1 November 2023. Full Parity Funding Rates are a higher set of funding rates available to education and care and hospital-based services who pay all employed certificated teachers according to the Full Parity Salary Scale.
Note: The Parity Salary Scale is only effective from 1 November 2023.
Note: The above 1 January 2025 standard funding rates were used to pay the 1 November 2024 advance funding for January and February 2025. From 1 January 2025 the home-based services standard funding rates will no longer be an option. The quality funding rates will remain. In the 1 March 2025 washup funding payment, all home-based payments from 1 January 2025 will be at the quality funding rates.
Note: Where a service meets both definitions, general purpose financial reports are required.
Note: Where an educator is not able to provide education and care due to a non-controllable health and safety issue stemming from an infectious illness, home-based services can apply to their local Ministry office for emergency closure approval to use absence funding. This only applies to the educator, not other residents in their household. If approved, then normal absence funding rules apply.
Note: a maximum of 6 hours can be claimed each day for each licensed child-place.
Notes to the financial statements.
Notifiable disease (Doctors notify the Public Health Service)
Notifiable disease (Doctors notify the public health service)
Notifying a specified agency
Notional Rolls are reviewed once each funding period for the first 12 months, and then at least once every 12 months after that.
Notional rolls will be reviewed regularly against average actual attendance to ensure funding can be delivered fairly and accurately.
November funding round: June to September.
Now let's go to the Statement of Cash Flows worksheet. Check that line 47 and columns I through K have returned and nil balance for each column. If not, then you will have to investigate the reason for any imbalance and fix accordingly at its source.
Now select SDP School Data Portal from the list of options.
Now the worksheets are grouped, please note any changes you make will be applied to all six worksheets. So please be careful not to type anything or make any other changes.
Now, as we were going through this, during these sessions,
Number and ages of children and whether any are receiving out-of-school care.
Number of certificated teachers your ECE service needs
Numbers ending in 0.5 or above may be rounded up to the next number. Numbers ending in 0.4 or below should be rounded down to the previous number.
Numbers ending in 0.5 or above should be rounded up to the next whole number. Numbers ending in 0.4 or below should be rounded down to the previous number.
Numbers of each item will depend on the size of your group. The list below gives suggested items but not recommended numbers, as this will be different for each group. Consider the age and the developmental stage of the children as well as the size of your group when buying equipment.
Nurses may need to be included.
Nurturing young minds together. Explore resources and guidance to support early learning adventures.
Nutrition standards for Ka Ora, Ka Ako menus
Oamaru Free Kindergarten Association
Observations during holiday periods
Obtain in writing from the person or organisation completing the safety check that they have done this to the standard set out in the Children's Act 2014.
Occasionally, scalp infections that require treatment may develop
Occasionally, we may contact you about your home education exemption.
October (payment on the first working day in November).
Office of the Privacy Commissioner
Office of the Privacy Commissioner.
Official Information Act and media responses
Official Information Act requests
Official information is any information held by the government. This includes Ministers of the Crown in their official capacity and government departments and ministries, including the Ministry of Education.
Official information requests
Official surname and given names (including middle name/s).
Offsetting funding recoveries
Offsite manufactured building panel
Oh, and excuse me. Uh, thank you Tiffany.
Oh, well, I think that's probably all the time
Okay. So, um, Catherine's asked, uh, regarding, uh,
Okay. There will be plenty of time for questions at the end,
Okay? So I knew this wouldn't take as long
Older children in nappies need to be encouraged to be as independent as possible:
Older out-of-school care children must not be expected to help carry non-walking children during an emergency drill, nor should they be responsible for the evacuation of ECE children.
On 1 May 2023 NZEI applied to MBIE to initiate a Fair Pay Agreement for the early childhood sector.
On 1 October 2024, this section was removed.
On 1 September, Kowhai Street Childcare Centre had 3 children under the age of 2 enrolled in their service. One child under the age of 2 attended casually.
On 1 September, Kowhai Street Childcare Centre had 5 children enrolled and receiving 20 Hours ECE.
On 1 September, Kowhai Street Childcare Centre had 6 children aged 2 or over enrolled in their service. Four children aged 2 or over attended casually.
On 1 September, Kowhai Street Childcare Centre had five children enrolled and receiving 20 Hours ECE.
On 1 September, Kowhai Street Childcare Centre had six children aged two or over enrolled in their service. Four children aged two or over attended casually.
On 1 September, Kowhai Street Childcare Centre had three children under the age of two enrolled in their service. One child under the age of two attended casually.
On 1 September, Moana Valley Preschool held 2 sessions. At the morning session, 2 certificated teachers (Chris and Leilani) were working. Each counted towards regulated (ratio) staff for 3 hours.
On 1 September, Moana Valley Preschool held two sessions. At the morning session, two certificated teachers (Chris and Leilani) were working. Each counted towards regulated (ratio) staff for 3 hours.
On duty does not mean just being on the premises or solely involved in administration.
On duty means working and involved with the children for all the hours that the service is open for children.
On duty: home-based education and care coordinators
On school-led projects, the project manager does the performance review. The property advisor supports you to do this.
On the RS7 Return they are to be noted as TOD. Funded child hours and staff hour count are not to be entered for teacher only days.
On the morning of the scheduled visit, the Persons responsible (Co-ordinator / visiting teacher) phones the educator to check the child is attending.
On this worksheet, you need to make some manual selections in column B to choose the rows to print.
Onboarding and offboarding checklists - templates
Onboarding and offboarding procedures
Once a child is enrolled at a school, they are entitled to stay at the school, even if the enrolment scheme changes.
Once a child is enrolled at school, no funding can be claimed by an ECE service.
Once a month for sessional teacher led and parent/
Once a month, we release the full text of advice received.
Once a parent has agreed to pay an optional charge, the service or educator may enforce the payment as they would enforce a fee.
Once a parent has agreed to pay home-based educator top up payments, the home-based educator may enforce payments as they would enforce a fee.
Once a week for all-day teacher led services.
Once again, she experimented with a straight push with all 4 wheels on the ground and with a half lift with the back wheels raised. When these techniques failed again, she tried bending her knees and making herself lower then pushed from this squatting position. Then in frustration she performed the full lift leaning way back and carrying the buggy through the door again.
Once all the data has been entered check at the top of the page on line 4 to see if the worksheet is balanced.
Once an agreement to pay has been reached then services may enforce payment.
Once completed, forms should be returned to the Resourcing Division Contact Centre.
Once endorsed, your achievement challenges plan will be published on Education Counts.
Once feedback has been considered, updated content will be released in Term 4 this year and becomes required teaching from the start of 2026.
Once in the car park, take the first left and head towards the end where the Ministry of Education Visitor Car Parks are located. Each Visitor Car Park is numbered.
Once information is no longer required to be retained, it must be securely destroyed.
Once notified, we will follow up with the service to ensure any recommended actions are put in place.
Once the contract is awarded and work is underway, the contract needs to be managed closely.
Once the information is no longer required to be retained, it must be securely destroyed.
Once the initial step is agreed, a teacher will continue to progress up the salary scale, provided their teacher registration practicing certificate remains valid.
Once the thermostat has been adjusted to the required temperature, it can be locked to prevent accidental or unauthorised re-adjustment. Refer to PF24 Tempering valve.
Once we have finished researching McKenzie Residential School and Campbell Park School, rapid payments will be available for those schools.
Once you are happy with the preparation, run the trial balance report, confirming one more time that it has been saved in either CSV or XLS format and is located in the required folder.
Once you have all the information together, scan it into one PDF document ready for uploading via the school portal.
Once you have an ESL account, the delegated authoriser needs to add a
Once you have logged in select the dropdown option Annual Report 31 May in the School Data Portal to ensure your annual report is submitted correctly.
Once you have submitted, we will verify your details.
Once your child has been exempted from school, it is your responsibility to teach your child.
Once your claim is received, we will provide you with information about the claims process.
One Pacific language is the main way to talk to and teach children. It is used 81% or more of the time at the service. It is expected that children in the service can interact freely in this Pacific language, without being instructed.
One Pacific language is the principal language of communication and instruction with children. It is used 81% or more of the time, including during the implementation of the curriculum. It is expected that children in the service can interact freely in 1 Pacific language, without instruction.
One Pacific language is used at least 51% of the time as the language of communication and instruction with children, including in the implementation of the curriculum. English is accepted as a temporary language of instruction and communication. Not all children in the service are expected to interact freely in 1 Pacific language, however, will do so when instructed.
One Pacific language is used at least 51% of the time to talk to and teach children. English is accepted as a temporary language. Not all children in the service are expected to interact freely in the Pacific language. They will be able to do so when asked.
One of the important things that we started out is we,
One of these elements is that mokopuna attend
One thing I did want to touch on though,
One thing I wanted to state as well is that the,
Online training for bus controllers
Online with a suite of resources to assist you.
Only count Other Teacher Hours required to meet the regulated (ratio) staff requirements.
Only provide guest users with the minimum level of access and permissions they require. Make sure to revoke their access when no longer needed.
Only services who wish to receive the extended parity funding rates are required to pay a minimum salary to certificated teachers employed in a management position.
Only teacher experience within New Zealand can be counted towards the PITA.
Open shelves should only be used to store sealed packets or food in containers. Cupboards or storage units used for storing food need to be fit for purpose and designed to reduce the chances of food becoming contaminated by vermin and insects.
Open the GL file that contains the school's trial balance, budget and last year and copy the three columns and rows.
Open the school data portal and log in.
Operational changes to make the system easier to navigate and to improve data collection.
Operational funding information
Operational funding is the money your board receives for the day-to-day running of the school or
Operational guidelines: Regulation 28(2)(c)
Operational guidelines: Regulation 44 (1)(d)(ii)
Optimising the learning support workforce.
Optional charges are a request for a payment that parents may choose whether or not to make for a specific purpose, which can be one-off or ongoing, that:
Optional charges can be requested at any time after enrolment. Therefore, if requested at the time of planning the excursion, the charge can reflect real and actual costs.
Optional charges can not be a condition of initial or continued enrolment, or requested for:
Optional charges can only be requested for:
Optional charges cannot be requested for the administration of 20 Hours ECE, wage administration for Home-based educators or home management. More information on this can be found on this website.
Optional charges must apply for a specific purpose, which could be one-off or ongoing.
Optional charges must be for the actual costs of providing extra items or services. They could be:
Optional charges should reflect the real and actual costs of the additional item or activity.
Options for quality rates
Or the child has a short-term illness or condition that is supported by an EC13 Form, and this specifies the period of the exemption.
Or you can contact the Office of the Ombudsman.
Or, if your school doesn't have a website request the Ministry to host your annual report by sending an email to
Oral Item: Removal of Education and Learning Objectives
Oral health care is free for children until they turn 18.
Order a New Zealand birth certificate online.
Other adults or children present.
Other agencies, such as the New Zealand Police or the Teaching Council, may also investigate a reported incident.
Other annual reporting support material
Other home appliances such as televisions, stereos or microwave ovens should be secured with industrial Velcro or non-slip mats.
Other licensing criteria that interact with HS21:
Other licensing criteria that interact with HS24
Other licensing criteria that interact with HS8
Other parts of the periodic safety re-check should be completed to make sure risk has been assessed.
Other reports on special and contestable funding [MAY BE NECESSARY].
Other sanitary facilities
Other sources of ECE funding (removed April 2015): 2-3
Other things to consider when arranging travel in motor vehicles include:
Other things you might like to consider when arranging travel in motor vehicles include:
Other transport options that schools and caregivers may wish to explore if their students are ineligible for school transport assistance include:
Other useful sites for help with employment issues
Otherwise, you can contact our regional offices.
Our Data Quality report help guide explains how to report attendance correctly.
Our Education Counts website has guidance on how to prepare and submit your roll return.
Our Inclusive Education website has guides to supporting diverse learners that are helpful to both teachers and parents.
Our Specialised School Transport Assistance (SESTA) page has information about school transport assistance for students with safety and/or mobility needs.
Our applications and online systems site has more information about how to access and use
Our boarding allowance team assess the applications, considering the following criteria.
Our child protection policy
Our child protection policy applies to all employees, contractors and volunteers working for us.
Our commitment is built off the place and benefit of Pacific languages and Pacific bilingualism in Aotearoa.
Our design reviews are a collaborative process that gives expert advice to the project. We work with an independent and impartial panel of experts who support our team with reviews, including:
Our eLearning digital resource for early learning services helps build awareness and confidence in recognising, responding to and reporting on suspected child abuse and neglect.
Our education system reflects our unique and diverse society.
Our fact sheet explains how school bus routes are designed and extended. It also has information about timetables and bus stops.
Our factsheet has more information to help you plan for design reviews.
Our guide explains the requirements your early learning service must meet under the Children's Act 2014.
Our guide to sharing learning support information includes practical information, a consent checklist and protocol templates.
Our guidelines and instructions outline how boards must operate an enrolment scheme. These documents include templates of public notices and letters for boards to use.
Our home education guide has information about this.
Our legislation gives us powers to collect, use and share information we need to perform our statutory function to:
Our local offices are the first point of contact for early learning services, schools, parents, learning support and the wider community.
Our pay parity guide has more information about the scheme.
Our privacy policy is governed by the New Zealand Privacy Act 2020.
Our published OIA responses
Our regional office staff can support your school with any issues around reporting of child abuse or neglect, safety checking and child protection policies.
Our responsibilities around enrolment schemes are:
Our responsibilities under the Official Information Act 1982 (the Act) include responding to requests for official information from the media.
Our social media accounts are monitored between 8am and 5pm Monday to Friday and periodically in the evenings and on weekends and public holidays.
Our social media accounts may provide links to other websites or embed material which may contain information that is the copyright of third parties and subject to restrictions on use or reproduction.
Our specialists work in collaborative teams. Any specialists who work with your child and their teachers will be able to use a wide range of resources and expertise. Our team includes:
Our toolkit supports your board and principal to implement
Our transparency statement explains how we collect, use and share information gathered about individuals and organisations for the purposes of carrying out our statutory functions under the Education and Training Act 2020.
Our transport contract manager will liaise between the TSP and schools as needed.
Our weathertightness design standards have details of the standards you must follow.
Our website also has information about how you can request information under the Official Information Act 1982 and the Privacy Act 2020 on our contact page.
Our work in education aligns to the objectives for Pacific Languages Strategy:
Our work in education aligns to the objectives for Pacific Wellbeing Strategy:
Our work in education aligns to the overarching objectives for the Education System:
Our written direction to the service will include:
Out of those 30 hours weekly maximum per child, 20 hours per week may be claimed as 20 Hours ECE. The remaining hours up to 30 may be claimed as Plus 10 ECE funding.
Out-of-zone pre-enrolment process
Outbound exchange students are not considered as enrolled in their New Zealand school while they are on exchange. You do not receive funding for them.
Outdoor activity space is:
Outdoor space should enable children to experience natural settings (for example, wind, sky, sun, rain) and enable children to undertake activities that would generally not be allowed inside a building (for example, running, kicking a ball). The suitability of the outdoor space to provide learning outcomes for children will be assessed on a case-by-case basis, taking into account the practicalities and risks of each case under the provisions of Regulation 54(3) of the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008.
Over September and October 2024, we consulted on the topic of our next long-term insights briefing, realising the potential for technology to support personalised and tailored learning in the future.
Overseas qualifications must be assessed by the New Zealand Qualifications Authority (NZQA) as comparable to the nearest New Zealand equivalent qualifications.
Overseas qualifications must be comparable to a New Zealand early learning or primary teaching qualification. Teachers with an overseas qualification must apply to the New Zealand Qualifications Authority (NZQA) for an International Qualifications Assessment.
Overseas teaching experience can sometimes be recognised as a qualification. The Teaching Council of Aotearoa New Zealand has more information.
Overview: Mixed Model Approach for Supporting Learners
P1, P2 and P3 for teachers who hold a current practising certificate issued by the Teaching Council of Aotearoa New Zealand but no subject or specialist qualification at level 7 or above on the NZQF, or equivalent overseas teaching qualifications recognised by the NZQA.
P3+ for teachers who hold a current practising certificate issued by the Teaching Council of Aotearoa New Zealand and:
P4 for teachers who hold a current practising certificate issued by the Teaching Council of Aotearoa New Zealand and:
P5 for teachers who hold a current practising certificate issued by the Teaching Council of Aotearoa New Zealand and:
PF1 Design and layout of premises
PF1 Hospital legislation compliance
PF10 Heating, lighting and ventilation
PF11 Outdoor activity space
PF12 Handwashing facilities
PF12 Heating, lighting, noise and ventilation
PF12 Lighting, ventilation, heating and acoustic materials
PF13 Outdoor activity space
PF14 Infant toddler safe space
PF16 Toilet and handwashing facilities
PF17 Kitchens inaccessible
PF17 Nappy change facilities
PF18 Body wash facilities
PF19 Handwashing facilities
PF19 Handwashing facilities ratio
PF2 Infant toddler safe space
PF2 Premises support effective supervision
PF20 Design of sleep provisions
PF20 Toilet and handwashing facilities
PF21 Hand drying facilities
PF24 Water temperature control
PF25 Nappy change facilities
PF26 Body wash facilities
PF29 Design of sleep provisions
PF3 Building Act compliance
PF3 Safe furniture and equipment
PF32 Sessional over 2 sleep space
PF32 Sessional services only: over 2 sleep space
PF33 All-day over 2 sleep space
PF33 All-day services only: over 2 sleep space
PF34 All-day over 2 sleep provisions
PF34 All-day services only: over 2 sleep provisions
PF35 Sessional services only: under 2 sleep space
PF35 Sessional under 2 sleep space
PF36 Sessional services only: under 2 cot:child ratio
PF36 Sessional under 2 cot:child ratio
PF37 All-day services: under 2 sleep space
PF37 All-day under 2 sleep space
PF38 All-day services: under 2 child:cot ratio
PF38 All-day under 2 child:cot ratio
PF4 Toilet and handwashing facilities
PF5 Infant toddler safe space
PF5 Nappy change facilities
PF5 Safe furniture and equipment
PF7 Outdoor activity space
PF8 Opportunities for active play
PF8 Premises support effective supervision
PF9 Infant toddler safe space
PG3: Playgroup funding claim
PG4: Playgroup special grant
PPPM panel suppliers can contact the procurement team in their region for questions or clarifications.
PVC pipes and guttering, planks of untreated wood
Pacific Education Foundation
Pacific Education Foundation scholarships
Pacific Education Foundation scholarships aim to encourage Pacific students into tertiary education. The scholarships can be used for any area of study at either graduate or postgraduate level.
Pacific Languages Strategy
Pacific Languages Strategy in 2021
Pacific bilingual and immersion education means at least 1 Pacific language is the medium of education instruction for 51% or more of the time (or more than 12.5 hours per week).
Pacific languages have a special place within Aotearoa and within our education system.
Pacific languages in education
Pacific languages recognised for PITA
Pacific-Languages-Strategy-2022-2032.pdf (mpp.govt.nz)
Paid supervisors/coordinators working in playgroups need to be safety checked if any children attend without a parent or guardian present. Volunteers, for example parents attending with their children, do not need to be safety checked.
Pain in jaw, then swelling in front of ear and fever
Paper towels or individual hand towels are more hygienic than a single communal towel.
Paper-based attendance schedules must be maintained and verified in pen. Electronic attendance schedules must adhere to the Electronic Attendance Records Criteria outlined in chapter 6-3 of the Funding Handbook.
Paper-based enrolment and staffing schedules must be maintained in pen. If these documents are electronically generated, alterations and verification must be in pen.
Parent helpers need to actively supervise the children in their care. This means being close enough to keep them safe at all times. They should not let any child leave their group.
Parent involvement and information
Parental acknowledgement could be:
Parental acknowledgement of the medicine having been given to their child must also be recorded. Category (i) and (ii) medicines require daily parental acknowledgement, whereas parental acknowledgement may be obtained and recorded weekly or every 3 months for category (iii) medicines whose dosage does not change.
Parental permission upon enrolment.
Parenting courses and information
Parents and caregivers can request a review of an eligibility decision by emailing the School Transport team.
Parents and educators need to decide who provides any infant formula and bottles. If the educator provides the formula, parental approval of the brand/type is required before it is used. If the usual brand/type is unavailable, parental approval of any substitute is also required prior to its use.
Parents and legal guardians
Parents and legal guardians are required to:
Parents are advised how to access:
Parents are collecting the child
Parents can attest as part of the enrolment form that their child does not receive more than 6 hours per day and 20 hours per week of 20 Hours ECE as a total across all services the child attends.
Parents can be charged fees for hours outside 20 hours ECE
Parents can only be charged fees for hours outside of the 20 Hours ECE maximum of 6 hours per day and 20 hours per week per child.
Parents feel that they are well-informed and that their views are respected and taken note of.
Parents may choose to allocate their 20 Hours ECE hours across more than 1 service.
Parents must attest on the enrolment agreement form that their child does not receive more than 6 hours per day and 20 hours per week of 20 Hours ECE as a total across all services the child attends.
Parents must confirm the total hours per day of 20 Hours ECE the child will receive at the service and any other service the child is enrolled to attend.
Parents must have a choice about whether they want to pay for the additional item or activity covered by the optional charge. They must be informed in writing that agreeing to an optional charge is not compulsory, and they must not be penalised for choosing not to pay an optional charge.
Parents must not be charged fees for hours claimed as 20 Hours ECE.
Parents must not pay fees for 20 hours ECE
Parents need to accept that there is no place for smoking, alcohol or other illegal drugs on any excursion.
Parents need to agree to follow all the requests and expectations of the teaching team.
Parents need to be informed where the evacuation point will be so they will know where their children will be.
Parents of children attending the service and adults providing education and care are provided with opportunities to contribute to the development and review of the service's operational documents (such as philosophy, policies and procedures and any other documents that set out how day to day operations will be conducted).
Parents of children attending the service and adults providing education and care are provided with opportunities to contribute to the development and review of the service's operational documents (such as philosophy, policies and procedures and any other documents that set out how day-to-day operations will be conducted).
Parents of children attending the service and adults providing education and care are provided with opportunities to contribute to the development and review of the service's operational documents (such as philosophy, policies, and procedures and any other documents that set out how day-to-day operations will be conducted).
Parents of children participating in the service and adults providing education and care are provided with opportunities to contribute to the development and review of the service's operational documents (such as philosophy, policies and procedures and any other documents that set out how day-to-day operations will be conducted).
Parents should be aware of safe searching techniques and provide information to children on how to react and deal with unsolicited, inappropriate material.
Parents should never smoke or vape at the playgroup while children are attending the service.
Parents who choose not to pay an optional charge must receive at least the standard of service required by the regulations. It is the responsibility of the service providing 20 Hours ECE to ensure parents do not pay a fee for hours covered by 20 Hours ECE, either to the service provider or the educator (in the case of a Home-based service).
Parents who choose not to pay optional charges
Parents will choose which days the 20 Hours ECE hours will be allocated to, but no individual day may exceed six 20 Hours ECE hours.
Parents' views are sought and recorded.
Parents, caregivers and educators should guide children on how to use equipment appropriately and safely.
Parents, caregivers and educators should have regular conversations about how play is supervised in their own setting.
Parents/caregivers need to be made aware that reports from ERO are free and available from the local ERO office on request.
Parents/caregivers need to be made aware that reports from ERO are free and available from the local ERO office on request. They can also be downloaded from the Education Review Office.
Parents/caregivers need to be made aware that reports from the Education Review Office (ERO) are free and available from the local ERO office on request.
Parity Funding Rates are available to services who pay at least Parity Salary Scale (Step 1 to 6).
Parity Funding Rates are available to services who pay at least Steps 1 to 6.
Parity Salary Scale (Step 1 to 6).
Parity Salary Scale (Step 1-6)
Parity Salary Scale (Step 1-6).
Parity funding rates are available to education and care services who agree to pay all employed certificated teachers according to Step 1 to 6 of the Parity Salary Scale.
Parity salary scale (Step 1-6)
Parity salary scale example: March funding period
Parking is available on Bellingham Street and surrounding streets, or at the Ormiston Shopping Centre. Avoid parking in the Pak'n Save carpark to prevent fines or towing.
Part of the check involves asking your child's early learning service about their learning and development.
Partial Step 1 - 11 + Partial management step: Extended parity funding rates. Band determined by the service's certificated ratio.
Participate in public consultations with the Ministry of Education.
Participate in the opportunities provided by the ECE service to engage with parents.
Partner with families to design education opportunities together with teachers, leaders and educational professionals so aspirations for learning and employment can be met.
Partnerships are developed with
Partnerships involving regular consultation with parents, guardians, and
Parts of the home used by children have:
Passwordless authentication
Pay equity and pay parity
Pay parity guide for ECE teachers and service providers
Pay parity in Early Childhood Education
Pay parity opt-in scheme for education and care services
Pay particular attention to frequently used areas.
Paying the EEL is a requirement under the Education (Export Education Levy) Regulations 2022.
Payment records for 20 Hours ECE
Payment to individual services is the responsibility of the service provider.
Payments are made on the 20th of each month.
Payments for former Ministry employees
Payments through the Unfunded International Providers (UIP) portal
Payroll error (February).
Payroll exception reports (March).
People and employment in early learning
People who have regular or overnight contact with children at school or kura without parents or guardians must undergo a full safety check.
Percentage of students at or above the expected curriculum level, by subject
Performance & security by
Performance management starter pack
Periodic rechecking must be done every 3 years.
Periodic safety checking of existing children's worker
Permanently enrolled children with special needs or health problems may be exempt from the Frequent Absence Rule or funded for continuous absences beyond the 3-week period.
Permission for special excursions needs to be sought for each excursion.
Person responsible observation of each educator and child
Person responsible requirements
Personal information is any information about an identifiable individual. The type of information we collect will depend on the service we are providing or the function we are carrying out. It can include:
Personal information is any information that relates to, and could identify, an individual.
Personal information is being collected by the Ministry for the purpose of assessing your claim. We are committed to keeping your information safe. Any information you provide, including your name, contact details, and information about your claim, will be securely filed. Information you provide will only be used for the purpose it was collected for and will not be disclosed by the Ministry except in accordance with the Privacy Act 2020 and any relevant Court orders.
Persons or organisations wishing to send email material to individuals or organisations whose email addresses appear on this website must comply with the requirements of the Unsolicited Electronic Messages Act 2007.
Persons responsible (Co-ordinator / visiting teacher) cannot observe children outside their normal enrolment hours. Therefore, their hours of work must align with the enrolment hours of the children under their supervision.
Persons responsible (Co-ordinator / visiting teacher) must not conduct more than 2 observations outside the home per 12-month period, and these should not occur 2 months in a row. They must visit the child in the enrolled home setting in between. Observations outside the home can occur in addition to the home visit for any given month.
Persons responsible (Co-ordinator / visiting teacher) visits must take place primarily in the home in which the child is enrolled for education and care. This applies to all homes, including those in rural and remote locations.
Persons responsible have primary responsibility for overseeing the education and care, comfort, health and safety of children attending the service. They also provide professional leadership and support to educators within the service.
Persons responsible hold a number of important roles. They supervise children and staff, and they are directly involved in and primarily responsible for the day-to-day education and care, comfort, and health and safety of children attending the service.
Persons responsible in teacher-led centre-based services must:
Persons responsible must have a recognised early childhood teaching qualification and a current practising certificate from the Teaching Council of Aotearoa New Zealand.
Persons responsible must have an ECE or primary teaching qualification and a current practising certificate.
Persons responsible must work with children and staff and should not be engaged in activities that take them away from their supervision responsibilities. For example, they should not be located in an office with no children physically present undertaking administration duties.
Pets kept in home-based settings need their habitats to be cleaned and maintained as required depending on the needs of the animal, and children supervised when interacting with them.
Philosophy means a statement that:
Philosophy, goals and professional development are clearly linked.
Phone: (04) 463 8383 (0800 ECE ECE)
Photographs and other observations are analysed to identify the learning that has occurred and how to build on it.
Physical Restraint Guidelines
Physical holds and releases training
Physical or mental unwellness includes:
Physical restraint incident reporting
Physical restraints resource overview and 4 modules
Pipsqueak job descriptions
Pipsqueak playgroup roster, Term 4, 2009
Places for children to sit and eat could include:
Places for children to sit and eat include:
Placing an insert into a sink facility used for another purpose to prevent art materials from coming into contact with any cleaning waste or chemical residues, and/or to prevent paint or wastewater from coming into contact with the sink.
Planning and documentation
Planning and preparing for emergencies
Planning and providing for a range of learning experiences and opportunities
Planning, evaluation, and assessment documentation clearly identify the learning that has occurred for the child.
Plans will use the STAR and be tailored to meet the needs of each school community. Regulations relating to these plans will be progressed this year to come into effect for the start of Term 1 2026.
Plastic equipment, while cheap, easily accessible and attractive to children, is often poor imitations of real objects. For example, a plastic hammer, plastic spanner and plastic carpentry bench have little educational value for carpentry play. By using a real hammer or spanner successfully, a child can learn a lot of carpentry skills as well as gain useful knowledge about these objects and their uses. With adult support, children will also learn about important issues relating to the safe use of real equipment.
Play specialists should be aware of safe searching techniques and provide information to children on how to react and deal with unsolicited, inappropriate material.
Playcentre Educator Award or 2 Playcentre Introductory Awards.
Playcentre Practice (course 4 of The Playcentre Diploma in Early Childhood and Adult Education).
Playcentre Practice (course 4 of the Playcentre Diploma in Early Childhood and Adult Education).
Playcentre Sessions (course 3 of The Playcentre Diploma in Early Childhood and Adult Education).
Playcentre and playgroups are parent-led and can choose to employ qualified teachers but are not required to.
Playcentre in Context (course 5 of the Playcentre Diploma in Early Childhood and Adult Education), and
Playcentre in Context (course 5 of the Playcentre Diploma in Early Childhood and Adult Education).
Playcentres and playgroups rely on your involvement and support to operate. Other early learning services are less reliant on
Playcentres are licensed and must meet the same standards for education and care as teacher-led services, but have different qualification requirements.
Playcentres cater for children from birth to school age. They are run cooperatively by parents and
Playcentres choosing to take up 20 Hours ECE cannot claim initial advance funding for 20 Hours ECE.
Playcentres choosing to take up 20 Hours ECE in their centres cannot claim initial advance funding for 20 Hours ECE.
Playcentres meeting the group supervision requirements for standard funding (as specified in section 3-C-3) can access quality funding if one more adult with the Playcentre Introductory Award is on duty on the session. This adult would be in addition to those required by the group supervision requirements for standard funding. So, the number of required adults on session effectively increases by one.
Playcentres should contact their relevant Ministry regional office as early as possible to discuss their situation. It is important to note that if a playcentre does not meet the conditions on any provisional licence then the licence must be cancelled.
Playcentres that cannot meet the person responsible or minimum qualifications for group supervision may be eligible for discretionary funding for up to 5 sessions per funding period. All other supervision and licensing requirements must be met including adult:child ratios and first aid qualification requirements.
Playcentres with no person responsible
Playground inspection attestation form
Playgroup Funding Handbook
Playgroup aim and information example 1
Playgroup aim and information example 2
Playgroup aim and information example 3
Playgroup asset inventory
Playgroup funding handbook
Playgroup operational funding: a general grant available to all eligible playgroups to assist with ongoing operational costs.
Playgroup special grant factsheet
Playgroup special grant: a discretionary grant available to assist playgroups to meet large costs that cannot be met from other funding.
Playgroups are certificated in accordance with the Education and Training Act 2020 under the Education (Playgroups) Regulations 2008, which prescribe minimum standards that each certificated playgroup must meet. Certification criteria are used to assess how playgroups meet the minimum standards required by the regulations.
Playgroups are community-based groups run by parent and
Playgroups are expected to have emergency drills at least every 3 months. Evacuation drills should be organised to test a variety of emergency situations and scenarios. For example, practising both earthquake drills and fire evacuation drills, and practising evacuation via alternative exits if these are available. You should aim to hold your trial evacuations at times when you have typical numbers of children, of varying ages, and adults at the playgroup. Consider also the timing of evacuations and whether or not attending parents will be notified in advance. Holding unannounced evacuations at challenging times (for example during morning teatime) may be inconvenient but will give you greater assurance that your procedures are effective.
Playgroups are not licensed. To receive government funding and support, they need to be certified. Parents and
Playgroups are required to document a plan outlining the learning experiences and play opportunities they will provide. A plan provides a starting point for playgroups. It provides a summary of the experiences and opportunities available to children during sessions.
Playgroups are required to review the experiences and opportunities planned for and provided at playgroup at least every 12 months. Reviewing these will help you to make sure they are consistent with the curriculum framework.
Playgroups do not receive the same level of funding as licensed ECE services.
Playgroups give children of all ages the chance to work and play together.
Playgroups have access to a range of organisations that support families, like Plunket, Barnardos, Ministry of Social Development (MSD), Rural Education Activities Programmes (REAP), local schools, councils and community networks such as churches. Information from these organisations could be made available to parents and caregivers.
Playgroups meet in a variety of different premises, for example church halls,
Playgroups must have a child protection policy that meets the Children's Act 2014 requirements.
Playgroups must meet the Education (Playgroups) Regulations 2008 to be certified and receive government funding.
Playgroups must provide the Ministry of Education with name and address for a funding contact person and keep them informed when changes occur. This is the person that funding claim forms and other information are sent to.
Playgroups recognised as Licence-exempt prior to 1 December 2008 must continue to meet the definition of a playgroup published in the Education Gazette on 15 February 1991 to remain eligible for funding. Playgroups established after 1 December 2008 must hold a current interim or full certificate to be eligible for funding.
Playgroups should work with their education advisor to find satisfactory solutions.
Playgroups that are meeting the curriculum requirement will plan for and provide:
Playgroups/employers cannot rely on a safety check done by a different employer (either current or previous) as the check was not done on their behalf. They must carry out all of the components themselves.
Please contact your Ministry regional office or the Resourcing Contact Centre if you are unsure whether you are applying the Frequent Absence Rule correctly.
Please contact your regional finance advisor to provide your suggestions on other videos that may be helpful.
Please direct any questions about Playcentre qualifications to Playcentre Aotearoa.
Please direct any questions about the qualifications for Playcentres to your playcentre regional support team or Ministry regional office.
Please note however, that under HS8 Emergency drills, the Ministry requires services to carry out trial evacuations (covering a variety of emergency situations), on an at least 3-monthly basis. See the guidance for HS8 Emergency drills for more details.
Please refer to Chapter 10 of this handbook for further information on Equity Funding.
Please refer to Chapter 4 of this handbook for further information on 20 Hours ECE.
Please refer to the Glossary for more information about permanent enrolments.
Please refer to this section for an illustration of how to apply the Frequent Absence Rule.
Please send your feedback to:
Please update these errors as soon as you receive the report.
Plunket or another Well Child
Plus 10 ECE describes the remaining 10 hours of funding a service can claim for each child in addition to the 20 Hours ECE hours. It is the difference between 30 hours ECE Subsidy funding and the 20 Hours ECE hours.
Plus 10 ECE hours are the ECE Funding Subsidy funded hours available per child once that child has used all of their 20 Hours ECE hours.
Pokapu Waka Kura user guide for directly resourced schools
Pokapu waka kura user guide SESTA applications
Police vets at a governance level are also part of the process of applying for a probationary licence. Information about this is available in the EC1 probationary licence application form.
Police vets by other organisations
Police vets by the Teaching Council
Police vets for children's workers are part of the safety checking process all early learning services must complete.
Police vets for home-based care
Police vets for overseas children's workers
Police vets for schools and kura
Police vets must also be completed for anyone who, in the course of their work for the service provider, is not defined as a children's worker. This is set out in Schedule 4 of the Education and Training Act 2020.
Police vetting applications may take up to 20 business days to process.
Police vetting for early learning services
Police vetting is mandatory for anyone who is likely to have unsupervised access to students at a school during normal school hours.
Police vetting is part of the safety check process.
Policies should also contain provision for ensuring children are protected from harm by any person present at the home.
Policies, planning and investment optimise long-term social, environmental and economic benefits.
Policy approvals for amendments to school board priorities
Policy proposals progressed by ETAB 2
Pooling of Targeted Funding
Poor participation at school. For example, difficulty taking part in everyday classroom learning, completing schoolwork, poor attendance and not taking part in extra-curricular activities.
Poor relationships. For example, being socially isolated, having difficulty forming relationships and friendships, and/or lacking respect for others.
Portable cots can only be used in a home-based setting if they are used by a single child. As portable cots are made with a textile or mesh that allows for breathable air zones, they cannot be easily cleaned when used for multiple children (PF21, below).
Portable cots cannot be used in a centre-based setting. As portable cots are made with a textile or mesh that allows for breathable air zones, they cannot be easily cleaned when used for multiple children (PF30, below).
Portacom New Zealand Limited
Portfolios can be paper based or electronic and stored online and accessed securely by parents.
Portfolios can be paper based or electronic that can be stored online and accessed securely by parents.
Positive feedback from maths PLD
Positive mental health and wellbeing is feeling good, functioning well and feeling connected. It's important for all of us. For your child, good mental health helps them to be resilient, confident and secure so they get the most out of their education.
Positive steps are taken to prevent injury to people and damage to property resulting from unsecured heavy furniture, fixtures and equipment falling.
Positive steps are taken to respect and acknowledge the aspirations held by
Positive steps are taken to respect and acknowledge the aspirations held by parents and
Post Primary Teachers' Association
Post: PO Box 1666, Wellington 6140.
Practical skills, advice, and resources for finding your way after leaving school.
Pre-enrolment ballot deadlines
Pre-school bedrooms, indoor
Preferred or shortlisted respondent letter template
Pregnant women should seek advice from their maternity provider or GP.
Premises and facilities criteria for centre-based ECE services.
Premises and facilities criteria for home-based ECE services.
Premises and facilities criteria for hospital-based ECE services.
Premises and facilities criteria for playgroups.
Premises, furniture, furnishings, fittings, equipment, and materials are kept safe, hygienic, and maintained in good condition.
Premises, furniture, furnishings, fittings, equipment, and materials for the use of children attending are kept safe, hygienic, and maintained in good condition.
Premises, furniture, furnishings, fittings, equipment, and materials used by children as part of the ECE programme are kept safe, hygienic and maintained in good condition.
Prepare a procurement plan
Prepare for an emergency or traumatic incident in early learning
Preparing all young people for satisfying and rewarding working
Preparing for staff employment
Preparing or reviewing the statement of philosophy
Preparing the annual financial statements
Preparing young people for work is an important issue to explore. Although many young people navigate transitions from school to work, education or training, a significant proportion face barriers which prevent them from reaching their work goals and aspirations.
Preparing your roll return
Presentation by Chad Britton on preparing your annual report.
Presentation by Chad Britton, Ministry of Education.
Prevent someone from accidentally deleting or making changes to the system.
Prevent unauthorised access by not exposing it to the internet. If it does need to be internet-facing, restrict access by IP/CIDR or geolocation.
Preventing spread of illness to others
Previous experience relates to any experience that will be relevant to the certificated teacher's role.
Previous relevant work experience
Previously Worked As Teacher flag (permanent staff only).
Primary and Intermediate school terms and holidays 2025 calendar
Primary and intermediate school terms and holidays 2026 calendar
Primary and secondary education
Primary responsibilities of the position.
Primary, intermediate and specialist schools must be open for instruction for a minimum of 382 half days in 2025.
Primary, intermediate and specialist schools must be open for instruction for a minimum of 382 half days in 2026.
Primary, intermediate and specialist schools must be open for instruction for a minimum of 384 half days in 2024.
Principles of attendance in
Print edition ISBN 0790313847
Print edition ISBN 978-0-478-34174-4
Prior to the safety check, obtain confirmation from the person or organisation that they are undertaking the safety check on your behalf.
Prioritised payments for claimants who are terminally ill
Prioritised settlement payments are an option for any claimant who is terminally ill and not expected to survive longer than 12 months, regardless of any available medical treatment.
Prioritised settlement payments for claimants who are terminally ill.
Prioritising stronger learning support
Prioritising systems for least privilege
Privacy impact assessment
Privacy information related to this website and social media.
Private schools can have different terms and holidays. They can also open on Easter Tuesday. Check with the school.
Private schools get some government funding but are mostly funded through charging parents school fees. They develop their own learning programmes and do not have to follow the national curriculum.
Private schools have greater legislative freedom than state and state-integrated schools and can vary their opening hours and school year.
Private services are able to make financial gains and distribute these to their members.
Privately owned ECE services only
Probationary licence and application form for centre-based early learning
Probationary licence and application form for home-based early learning
Procedures can be developed in a way to facilitate discussion between coordinators, educators, and
Procedures should address:
Process for change of funding rate
Process for the 2 new rapid payment options
Processes and procedures to help manage behaviour
Processes for human resource management, including:
Procurement COI declaration and confidentiality agreement
Procurement of goods and services
Procurement recommendation report template
Procurements between $10,000 and $99,999
Procurements less than $10,000
Procurements less than $50,000
Procurements more than $10,000
Procurements more than $100,000
Procurements more than $50,000
Professional development and appraisals (or professional growth cycle)
Professional development for certificated teachers (in all practising certificate categories
Professional development for courses/seminars that are not aimed at improving the outcomes for priority learners.
Professional development for staff employed or engaged in the service is a priority, proactively supported and appropriately resourced.
Professional development is closely aligned to individual appraisal goals or the professional growth cycle for certificated teachers.
Professional learning and development
Professional officer of NZEI Te Riu Roa/PPTA/TTANZ.
Professional practice regarding separated parents/guardians
Professional services directory
Professional services registration of interest
Professional services request for proposal
Professional-Services-Request-for-Quote
Profile (of the successful applicant).
Programmes are between 2 weeks and 12 months in length.
Programmes should support
Progress Update on the Highest Needs Change Programme
Progress report 2020-2022
Progression of certificated
Progression of certificated staff through the salary steps described in this section is only a required funding condition while a service attests to meeting the requirements of the full salary scale. If a service chooses not to attest, at any point, the condition does not apply. However, legal agreements that specify salary progression may still apply (eg employment contracts).
Progression of certificated teachers through the allowance steps described in this section is only a required funding condition while a service attests to meeting the requirements of the allowance level that the service has attested to. If a service chooses not to attest, at any point, the condition does not apply. However, legal agreements that specify allowance entitlements may still apply (e.g., employment contracts).
Project and site constraints table
Prolonged or repeated exposure to limited employment has negative impacts on youth wellbeing and can have significant long-term consequences. This is a complex policy challenge with multi-generational consequences.
Property and infrastructure
Property contractor health and safety prequalification
Property procurement process for project managers
Property procurement step 1: plan the procurement
Property procurement step 2: specify requirements
Property procurement step 3: approach the market
Property procurement step 4: evaluate supplier offers
Property procurement step 5: award the contract
Property procurement step 6: manage the contract
Property programme and project management panel
Property project and programme management panel list
Proportion of students present more than 90% of the term
Proposed amendment to Te Uho o Te Nikau
Proposed changes to the Education and Training Amendment Bill (No 2)
Proposed enrolment scheme for Te Kura Rau Iti
Proposed enrolment scheme written descriptions and maps
Prosecution and Warnings Policy 2025
Prosecutions for non-attendance or non-enrolment are a last resort when all other attempts to return a student to enrolment and regular attendance have failed.
Protect children from adults who are unwell
Protect children from inappropriate material
Protect your information using passwords
Protect your information using strong passwords
Protecting children at early learning services
Provide a range of books for parents on such topics as:
Provide the PDF to your website provider for publishing, if your school has a website.
Providers must submit information and make a payment every 4 months:
Providers of educational or vocational training courses may have completed some of the components of the safety check as part of their enrolment process. For example, an interview, reference check and police vet.
Providers will benefit from a more modernised and effective regulatory system that allows for innovation, with less compliance costs.
Providing clear direction to the Teaching Council through a Statement of Government Policy and policy decisions on initial teacher education
Providing data through the ELI system does not replace the enrolment, attendance and absence records required for funding which are defined in Chapter 6.
Providing documents for parents to read:
Providing for the wellbeing of tertiary and international learners
Providing funding for innovative programmes through the Pacific Education Innovation Fund.
Providing information to parents could take a variety of forms. This information could be:
Providing liquid soap is recommended because it reduces the spread of infection. It should be easily accessible for each child using handwashing facilities.
Providing long stainless-steel troughs that have 3 or 4 warm water taps can be easier for 3 or 4 children to use, and easier to clean and manage soap spills than 3 or 4 individual sinks.
Providing written information to parents can take a variety of forms including:
Providing written information to parents could take a variety of forms including:
Providing written information to parents could take a variety of forms, including:
Providing written information to parents could take a variety of forms. This information can be provided in a variety of ways including:
Providing your RS7 Return to the Ministry
Provision for infants and toddlers
Provision of fee information
Public Service Commission
Public consultation on the notification period for school strikes
Public consultation on the use of unique identifiers for the Performance Based Research Fund
Public holidays must not be included in advance funding claims and will be paid by wash up.
Public holidays: Good Friday 3 April, Easter Monday 6 April, Easter Tuesday 7 April (a school holiday).
Public sector employment with education focus, e.g., Ministry of Education, Early Childhood Development or other Crown Education Agencies.
Publication of email addresses on the education.govt.nz website should not be taken as deemed consent to receiving unsolicited email.
Publications and documents published by the Ministry of Education.
Publishing your annual report online
Publishing your documents online
Purchase clay from Playcentre shops, quality toy shops or local potters' association. Detail the sort you want for example white, red, brown, smooth or gritty.
Purpose of a design review
Purpose of enrolment schemes
Purpose of the RS7 Return
Purpose of the funding claim audit
Purpose of this statement
Qualification Group Notations
Qualification and person responsible requirements for different service types
Qualification and persons responsible requirements vary according to the type of early learning service you run.
Qualification information
Qualification requirements
Qualification requirements and the person responsible role
Qualification requirements and the persons responsible role
Qualification requirements for educators
Qualification requirements for home-based early learning services
Qualification requirements for home-based services
Qualifications and university entry
Qualifications requirements
Qualified staff employed by your early learning service must have an early childhood education (ECE) teaching qualification recognised by the Teaching Council.
Quality Teaching and Leadership: Quality teaching and leadership make the difference for learners and their whanau.
Quality funding rates are available to home-based ECE services that meet the regulated qualification requirements. For more information please refer to 3-B-4.
Quality funding rates are available to playcentres and
Quality funding rates/options
Quality learning environments
Quarter 1 operational funding instalment paid.
Quarterly progress report
Questions about qualifications
Questions to consider when writing assessment policy that includes GenAI:
Questions to help playgroups plan what happens and how they happen
Quite a lot of them, uh, now,
RFx Process Terms and Conditions
RFx process and conditions of tendering
RS2 Change of Bank Account
RS3 Initial Application for Funding for an Early Childhood Service
RS3: Initial application for funding for a EC service
RS7 Early Childhood Funding Returns
RS7 returns must have a completed declaration
RS7: Early childhood funding return
RSE is essential for equipping young people with the knowledge and confidence to navigate important topics such as consent, healthy relationships, pubertal changes, and online safety. The draft framework aims to provide consistent, age-appropriate, and evidence-informed content from Years 0 to 13.
Rachel Vickers (New Plymouth)
Raise your complaint directly with the statutory appointee first. If you're not happy with the response from the appointee, contact your local office for support.
Rapid payment offers for claimants who attended
Rapid payment options are available to people who attended Mt Wellington/Waimokoia school and some people who have a terminal illness.
Rapid payment policy for sensitive claims
Rapid payments are an optional way some sensitive claims can be settled quickly without the need for a full assessment.
Rapid payments are an optional way to settle your claim with the Ministry quickly and without the need for a full assessment.
Rapid payments are now available for students who attended
Rapid payments for claimants who attended
Rashes and skin infections
Rates (and changes to rates) must be documented and provided to parents/caregivers.
Rates from 1 December 2023
Rates from 1 December 2024
Rates from 1 January 2023
Rates from 1 January 2024
Rates from 1 January 2025
Rates from 1 November 2023
Ratio flexibility in mixed-age early learning services
Ratio flexibility in mixed-age services under Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulation 44A.
Ratio requirements are part of the licensing criteria and are regulated by the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008, issued under section 636 of the Education and Training Act 2020.
Read about different types of schools in the network.
Read case studies of the use of GenAI at 2 New Zealand schools.
Read more about discretionary pathway registration on our website.
Read more about how the equity index works.
Read more about the Education and Training Amendment Bill (No 2).
Read more about the whakapapa of Tau Mai Te Reo, its past iteration, and more research that sits behind it.
Read more about this change:
Read our child protection policy
Read terms and conditions
Read the New Zealand gazette notices:
Read the application form before applying. It has information about:
Read the attendance code decision tree, attendance code guidance and frequently asked questions document for more information.
Read the final reports prepared by the probity auditor.
Read the following page for more information on safety checking for school staff.
Read the guide below for information about how to keep your child safe and what is expected of them while they travel on our buses.
Read the limitation policy and an easy-read guide to the policy.
Read the requirements and how to meet them for your service type:
Read this guide for information about when a student can transfer their eligibility for transport assistance to a different school.
Read this guide for more information.
Really important one here, student is present
Really the last one there is just a catch all around any other balances that you have in your financial statements and making sure that you have reconciliations and supporting information that sits in behind each of those.
Reasons for declining a media request
Recent initiatives include:
Reception, deliveries and couriers
Recognised ECE teaching qualification (or overseas qualification assessed as comparable by NZQA)
Recognised home-based qualifications
Recognised primary teaching qualification (or overseas qualification assessed as comparable by NZQA)
Recognised service is based on time spent working as a certificated teacher in New Zealand.
Recognition of previous relevant work experience as an uncertificated kaiako
Recognition of previous relevant work experience as an uncertificated teacher
Recommended options include the following.
Reconfirming an enrolment agreement
Record all children as absent for the day of the emergency closure. Funding may be claimed for the hours that children have a permanent enrolment subject to the funding maximums of the ECE Subsidy and 20 Hours ECE.
Record keeping also ensures the Ministry of Education can verify funding claims.
Record keeping for licensed home-based services
Record keeping requirements
Record keeping requirements for 20 hours ECE:
Record the Emergency Closure in your system (ELI or SMS).
Record the emergency closure in your system.
Record-keeping requirements: 4-4
Recorded outcomes from the review and evaluation process. Outcomes show how the service has regard for the Statement of National Education and Learning Priorities (NELP) in its operation.
Recording breaks/absences
Recording school visits on attendance records
Recording school visits on the enrolment agreement
Recording special arrangements
Records can be kept in a form to suit your service as long as the requirements set out in this Handbook are met.
Records can be stored in a form to suit your service but must be available on request to Ministry of Education staff, reviewers from the Education Review Office (ERO), and other authorised personnel.
Records for all children's workers
Records for children receiving 20 hours ECE
Records for children's workers employed after 1 July 2015
Records for children's workers employed before 1 July 2015
Records meet the requirements of the ECE funding handbook and include at least:
Records must be available for inspection by authorised Education Review Office and Ministry of Education auditing staff.
Records must be kept for 7 years.
Records must show that every 3 years you:
Records must show the list above, and also:
Records of staff qualifications
Records that demonstrate the employment relationship and the pay rate of the employed certificated teacher (education and care services and hospital-based services only).
Recovery of early childhood education funding: 2-7
Red cheeks and a lace-like rash on body
Reducing food-related choking for babies and young children
Refer to HS27 Medical assistance and incident management (below) for the requirement to keep records of serious illnesses.
Refer to Learning Environments for Playgroups for recipes.
Refer to PF25 Nappy change facilities for more information.
Refer to advertisements in the Education Gazette to help you.
Refer to criterion PF31 Bedding for more information.
Refer to criterion PF5 Safe furniture and equipment (above) for more information on relevant standards.
Refer to the Glossary in this Handbook for definition of discretionary hours.
Refer to the guidance for PF21 Hand drying facilities (below).
Reference information is identified by a book symbol.
Referrals go straight to a service provider who will allocate the referral to a
Refers to statutory or legal requirements, such as Acts, regulations, and the ECE Handbook.
Refresh of the Action Plan for Pacific Education for 2023
Refreshing achievement challenges
Regional Asset Manager, Auckland
Regional Infrastructure Manager
Regional Infrastructure Manager - Southern
Regional Infrastructure Manager, Central North
Regional Infrastructure Manager, Te Tai Tokerau
Regional Ministry staff will continue to work with boards to develop and amend enrolment schemes and will engage with them about any consultation processes planned for after 1 January 2021.
Regional Property Advisor
Regional Property Advisor (Tauranga Office)
Regional Public Health have no concerns about the air flow through and around the cots (HS10)
Regional Public Health produce a number of fact sheets on a variety of diseases.
Regional Public Health provides guidelines for washing soiled children including suggested spill kit contents.
Regional Public Health recommends that all washing is done in hot water with an adequate amount of laundry detergent.
Regional public health units recommend that all washing is done in hot water with an adequate amount of laundry detergent.
Registered private schools must have regard to the NELP when operating the school. They must also ensure that their staff consider the NELP when developing and delivering the curriculum.
Registered teachers are expected to disclose any new convictions and serious matters to the Teaching Council. The Teaching Council will not share the content of Police vets with schools.
Registered teachers are expected to disclose any new convictions and serious matters to the Teaching Council. The Teaching Council will not share the content of Police vets with you.
Regular opportunities (formal and informal) are provided for
Regular opportunities (formal and informal) are provided for parents to:
Regular practice also ensures that any equipment relied on in an emergency drill will be subject to regular checks, for example, any special equipment that might be used to assist in the evacuation of the non-walking children. It is also recommended that educators have a range of strategies available to manage any children whose behaviour has become disturbed during the emergency drill.
Regular practice will also ensure that any equipment that will be relied on in an emergency drill will be subject to regular checks, for example, any special equipment that might be used to assist in the evacuation of the non-walking children. It is also recommended that staff have a range of strategies available to manage any children whose behaviour has become disturbed during an emergency drill.
Regular practice will also ensure that any equipment that will be relied on in an evacuation will be subject to regular checks, for example, any special equipment that might be used to assist in the evacuation of the non-walking children. It is also recommended that the adults have a range of strategies available to manage any children whose behaviour has become disturbed during the evacuation.
Regular refresher training for all staff and volunteers.
Regular refresher training for all staff.
Regularity of Person responsible observations
Regulated (ratio) staff are staff required to meet the minimum regulatory requirements for staff:child ratios.
Regulated (ratio) staff hours
Regulated (ratio) staff hours are the total number of hours worked by all regulated (ratio) staff in a service each day.
Regulated (ratio) staff hours: 3-B-2
Regulation 18 Curriculum standard
Regulation 20 Premises and facilities standard
Regulation 21 Health and safety practices standard
Regulation 22 Management and administration standard
Regulation 28(2)(c) requires the person responsible (Co-ordinator/ visiting teacher) to take all reasonable steps each month to observe each child participating in the service while that child is receiving education and care.
Regulation 43 Curriculum standard: general
Regulation 44 (1)(d)(ii) requires that, at all times while children attend the service, there is 1 person responsible for every 50 children.
Regulation 44A allows you to use spare capacity in your under-2s group by treating older children as under-2s for ratio purposes. You have spare capacity if you have fewer under-2s attending your service than you could have under the adult-to-child ratio. This could help you stay within the minimum ratio for your 2-and-over group and avoid the need for more staff.
Regulation 45 Premises and facilities standard: general
Regulation 46 Health and safety practices standard: general
Regulation 47 Governance, management, and administration standard: general
Regulations and licensing criteria set out what you must do to protect the safety and wellbeing of children at your early learning service.
Regulations made under the Education and Training Act 2020 specify when all state and state-integrated schools and
Regulations, criteria, and rules we draft, publish and administer under the delegated authority of the Minister of Education.
Regulatory Impact Statements
Related to clause 46(1)(a) of standard.
Related to clause 47(1)(d) of standard.
Relating to actions you are taking to implement/prepare to implement curricula, assessment and
Relating to actions you are taking to lift attendance and reduce absence.
Relationships and interactions in the service engender respect between children, and between children and educators.
Relationships are a source of learning, empowerment, and identity for all of us. As educators if we believe everything we do has an impact on learning and teaching, we have a responsibility to engage in responsive and respectful relationships with children,
Relevant drills to be carried out with children are likely to at least include fire evacuation, earthquake, shelter in place and tsunami, depending on the services location. Lockdown is a drill that should be practiced by staff without children.
Relevant health and safety forms and checklists for playgroups are available to download from this page.
Relieving teaching hours of work at a Pacific immersion or bilingual service can count towards their length of service. Completion of 2,080 hours of work is equal to one year of service.
Relying on safety checking completed by another organisation on your behalf
Remember that the same ratios on the excursion must be met for all ages of children as you are required to do at the centre. However, given the inherent risks involved in taking children out of the centre, consideration should be given to increasing ratios.
Remember the same ratios on the excursion for all ages of children as you are required to do in the hospital-based service must be met.
Remember: You must take into account the Three Week Rule and Frequent Absence Rule when completing your RS7 Return. You can find more information on the absence rules in the sections listed below:
Remember: you may claim up to 6 hours per day and 30 hours per week for each licensed child-place.
Remove them immediately and let the air dry them. Never use a tea towel or cloth to dry or polish the dishes after they have been cleaned.
Removing barriers to learning - To remove barriers to participation in early learning and meet the basic needs of
Reo Rua Education and Care
Reo Rua Education and Care:
Reo rua education and care
Repeat Step 1 (above) for children aged 2 or over less any hours for children claimed as 20 Hours ECE.
Repeat Steps 4-5 for each day in the month.
Repeat for each day in the first month of the funding period.
Repeat steps 1 to 4 for each month in the funding period.
Repeat steps 1-3 for each day in the first month of the funding period.
Repeat the formula from Step 1 for the hours worked by Other Teachers who were being counted towards regulated (ratio) staff.
Report 1337441 Minister Stanford
Report 1337559 Minister Stanford
Report 1338030 Minister Stanford
Report 1339045 Minister Stanford
Report 1340068 Minister Stanford
Report back to Cabinet and overview of the mixed model approach
Report bullying to the police
Report on how the school has given effect to
Report suspected abuse or neglect of children and young people by adults
Report suspected outbreaks of communicable illnesses to your local Public Health service.
Report suspected outbreaks of communicable illnesses to your local public health service.
Reporting Requirements for Targeted Funding - 13-4
Reporting accident and incidents on school transport
Reporting accidents and incidents on school transport
Reporting of your daily attendance data
Reporting on Targeted Funding
Reporting requirement for service providers and licensees of more than one service
Reporting template for Targeted Funding for Disadvantage
Reporting to the Ministry
Reports about an incident at an early learning service can come from:
Reports may be subject to external review by the Ministry and/or the Education Review Office (ERO).
Request access to information we hold about you and to contact our Privacy Officer.
Request for a review of a decision
Requesting a review of an audit
Requesting a review of eligibility
Requesting optional charges for excursions and transport
Requests can be refused, or information withheld, but only if a good reason exists under the OIA for not providing the information.
Requests for commentary, opinion or interview are not defined as official information so they are not covered by the Act.
Required adult:child ratio
Required documentation is made available as appropriate to parents and Government officials having right of entry to the service under Section 626 of the Education and Training Act 2020.
Requirements for home-based services
Requirements include child protection policies, safety checks for children's workers and Police vetting for other staff and contractors.
Requirements when driving
Research and data requests
Research has shown that the factor that most contributes to reducing injuries and fatalities during any emergency evacuation is regular practice. This ensures that any coordinators and parents are familiar with procedures and that children also become familiar and comfortable with what is expected of them.
Research has shown that the factor that most contributes to reducing injuries and fatalities during any emergency situation is regular practice. This ensures that educators are familiar with procedures and that children also become familiar and comfortable with what is expected of them.
Research has shown that the factor that most contributes to reducing injuries and fatalities during any emergency situation is regular practice. This ensures that staff and adults at the centre are familiar with procedures and that children also become familiar and comfortable with what is expected of them.
Research has shown that the factor that most contributes to reducing injuries and fatalities during any emergency situation is regular practice. This ensures that staff and volunteers are familiar with procedures.
Research report about Mt Wellington/Waimokoia school
Research shows that teacher training and qualifications have a positive impact on learning outcomes for children.
Research the local market to understand how many qualified suppliers are available and may be interested in quoting for the work. Send a request for a quote to as many of them as possible.
Research to understand the features of quality Pacific Bilingual Education: Review of Best Practices
Reset a user's password - Google
Reset a user's password - Microsoft
Residential School because rapid payments will be based on standard findings for each school.
Resource Teachers of the Deaf
Resource Teachers: Learning and Behaviour (RTLB)
Resource consent conditions
Resources and tools to get career ideas, explore study options and create your CV.
Resources for all services
Resources for implementing the framework
Resources for preparing your annual accounts
Resources for schools, parents and
Resources for teacher-led services
Resources reflect ethnic diversity and the cultures of the families using the service.
Resources to go with Ka Hikitia
Resources to go with Tau Mai Te Reo
Resources, guidance, achievement standards, tools and co-requisites for both
Resourcing information for your school or
Responding to Official Information Act requests from the media
Responses to Official Information Act (OIA) requests that have substantive information and are of public interest.
Responses to Official Information Act requests
Responsibilities and safety
Responsibilities when using the transportation service
Responsibility for safety checking always rests with the employing or contracting organisation. This means centres/services should exercise due diligence when relying on checks undertaken by others. Things to consider include:
Responsibility for safety checking always rests with the employing or contracting organisation. This means playgroup should exercise due diligence when relying on checks undertaken by others. Things to consider include:
Restricted or no access to a child
Restrictions on spending Targeted Funding
Retain all procurement documentation in the project file for 7 years.
Return the RS2 form to ECE operational funding.
Returning to Teaching in Aotearoa New Zealand Practising Certificate.
Review your other systems and applications to make sure least privilege is applied. The vendors of your systems may provide guidance on how to edit and review access and permissions.
Reviewing the educational programme can be done in different ways and each playgroup will determine how best to do this for themselves. Many groups will find it useful to review what is being provided on a more regular basis than once a year. Talking at monthly meetings about what is or has been working well, and what you might want to do differently is a good starting point for regularly reflecting on how well your playgroup is working for its members.
Reviewing work with AI tools
Reviewing your homeschool programme
Revised Guidelines and Instructions for Enrolment Schemes were produced before December 2020. Until 1 January 2021, enrolment schemes were developed and operated under the existing guidance and legislation.
Revised attendance codes - FAQs
Risk assessments after a Police vet
Risk assessments after a Police vet for early learning services
Risk is the likelihood that death, injury or illness might occur when a person is exposed to a hazard. Risks must be managed by taking action to eliminate them, and if that is not reasonably practicable, minimising or isolating them. Eliminating a hazard will also eliminate any risks associated with that hazard.
Risk is the likelihood that death, injury or illness might occur when a person is exposed to a hazard. Risks must be managed by taking action to eliminate them, and if that is not reasonably practicable, minimizing or isolating them. Eliminating a hazard will also eliminate any risks associated with that hazard.
Risk management checklist
Risk mitigations such as increasing supervision or the use of safety matting do not meet the requirements of this criterion.
Robust cleaning procedures are needed to ensure all facilities are thoroughly cleaned before and after being used for art preparation and clean up.
Robust processes need to be in place to support the IT lead to implement least privilege. The following processes should be documented and carried out in practice.
Role-based access control (RBAC) is a method for managing user access to systems by assigning permissions to roles rather than individuals. It is considered good practice to ensure the right level of access is applied.
Roles and responsibilities guides
Roles and responsibilities in the procurement process
Roll returns give us data about the students enrolled at each school in New Zealand.
Rooms used by children at a comfortable temperature
Rotary Youth Exchange New Zealand
Round the total to the nearest hour.
Round the total to the nearest whole number.
Round the total to the nearest whole number. Numbers ending in 0.5 or above should be rounded up to the next whole number. Numbers ending in 0.4 or below should be rounded down to the previous whole number.
Round the totals to the nearest whole number.
Royal Commission into Abuse in State Care and in Care of Faith-Based Institutions
Royal Commission of Inquiry
Ruahine Kindergarten Association
Rule for extended non-operation
Rules about counting time for claims about abuse in State care
Rules about standing and using seatbelts on school buses
Rules for allocating middle management allowances
Rules for allocating salary units
Rules for allocating senior management allowances
Rules for early childhood education
Rules set by the Ministry to limit funding that may be claimed for children permanently enrolled at a service who are either continuously or frequently absent. Absence funding cannot be claimed for children who are casually or conditionally enrolled.
Runny nose and eyes, cough and fever, followed a few days later by a rash
Runny nose, persistent cough followed by "whoop", vomiting or breathlessness
SESTA (Specialised School Transport Assistance)
SESTA Conveyance Allowance
SESTA drivers are expressly forbidden to touch any student or leave the vehicle unattended. This means school staff must:
SESTA may be available for students at your school who can't travel to and from school independently due to safety and/or mobility need
SESTA request for a review of a decision form
SESTA request for review decision
SESTA: roles and responsibilities guide
SMS vendors at present, um,
SMS vendors providing a service to tertiary organisations can find out how to integrate with NSI on the application website.
Safe and hygienic handling practices are implemented with regard to any animals at the service. All animals are able to be restrained.
Safe and hygienic handling practices are implemented with regard to any animals. All animals on the premises are able to be restrained.
Safeguarding Children has information about what to do if you are worried about a child, and what to report to Oranga Tamariki.
Safer organisations Safer children
Safer organisations, Safer children
Safer recruitment Safer children
Safety and behaviour on school transport
Safety and hygiene when eating outside
Safety and suitability of surfaces, furniture, equipment and materials are also covered under Criterion PF3 Safe furniture and equipment which covers purchasing and installing playground equipment and surfacing.
Safety and suitability of surfaces, furniture, equipment and materials both indoors and outdoors are also covered under criterion PF5 Safe furniture and equipment which covers purchasing and installing playground equipment and surfacing.
Safety check assessment tool
Safety checking common questions
Safety checking cover sheet
Safety checking for child protection in early learning
Safety checking general guidance
Safety checking includes the collection and consideration of a range of information about the person.
Safety checking of trainees and students on practicum
Safety checking record keeping requirements are outlined in the criteria for each service type:
Safety checking relief teachers
Safety checking tools and resources
Safety checks and Police vetting is required by the Children's Act 2014.
Safety checks by a third party
Safety checks for adults in schools poster
Safety drills to teach your students
Safety on the bus is a shared responsibility
Salaries is used to determine
Salaries reflect base pay
Salary from 1 December 2023
Salary from 1 January 2023
Salary from 1 November 2023
Salary progression is linked to qualifications. Section 11 of the pay parity guide explains salary progression, including salary progression with improved qualifications.
Salary progression: Improved qualifications
Salary protection only applies to permanent units.
Salmonella: 6 to 72 hours
Sand and water play can be brought inside (with some careful planning and supervision).
Saturday 12 April to Sunday 27 April 2025.
Saturday 13 April to Sunday 28 April 2024.
Saturday 20 September to Sunday 5 October 2025.
Saturday 26 September to Sunday 11 October 2026.
Saturday 28 June to Sunday 13 July 2025.
Saturday 28 September to Sunday 13 October 2024.
Saturday 4 July to Sunday 19 July 2026.
Saturday 6 July to Sunday 21 July 2024.
Save iterations as you go.
Scanning or regularly looking around to observe all children and to be aware when one moves out of view.
Schedule 2 identifies which adults can be counted when determining the adult-to-child ratios.
Schedule 2 of the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations sets out the adult-to-child ratios required for each age group and service type.
Schedule 20 of the Act makes the Ministry of Education responsible for developing and consulting on enrolment schemes.
Scholarships and study awards
Scholarships for study and training
School Annual Accrual Report Certification
School Bus Procurement Request for Proposal - Tender 1
School Bus Procurement Request for Proposals - Tender 2
School Data Quality report help guide
School Error Report Summary Calculator
School Evaluation of Physical Environment.
School Lunch Collective model
School Property Officer - Christchurch
School Property Officer - Invercargill
School Property Officer - Nelson
School Support Limited (24 hours, 7 days a week)
School Transport Assistance
School and kura boards must prepare and submit accurate roll data to us on certain dates each year. This is known as the roll return.
School and kura resourcing roll audits
School and kura roll returns
School annual accrual report (SAAR) and 'leave liability' reports.
School annual financial statements
School attendance quick reference guide
School board objectives and NELP
School boards are legally required to provide a safe environment for students. They will discuss your complaint at a board meeting. You may ask to attend, and you can also ask to speak at the meeting.
School boards must consider that information to assess whether the person would pose a risk to the safety of children if they were to work at the school.
School boards must follow the key dates for application and ballot deadlines. These are set out in the instructions. They must coordinate and share ballot deadlines with other schools in their region or city.
School bus code of conduct
School bus conveyance allowance
School bus route design and route changes
School bus route design information
School bus routes fall within the Transport Eligibility Zone of the schools they service.
School child protection policy
School employers must now make sure all new, beginning, and overseas teachers complete the compulsory module 'Physical Restraint - Understanding the Rules and Guidelines' within 10 weeks of starting at the school. Support staff in a team supporting a student with restraint as part of their support plan must also complete the compulsory online module.
School enrolment schemes in New Zealand
School enrolment zones, on the other hand, are geographically defined areas around schools to prevent them from becoming overcrowded.
School exchange programmes
School exchanges are programmes where students can live and study in another country. Students get the chance to experience a new school, a different education system, a new culture, and sometimes a new language. Most exchange students live with host families.
School exchanges may be run directly by schools or by private exchange programme organisations (EPOs).
School leavers embark on a new journey. Support them with guidance, and resources for a successful transition to the next chapter
School leavers' toolkit for teachers
School opening and closing for instruction
School planning and reporting
School playground outdoor
School principals are usually assigned this role.
School principals' salary grades
School property contractors
School property meets agreed standards to support teachers to succeed.
School property procurement ROI evaluation workbook
School property procurement evaluator's guide
School property procurement open tender evaluation workbook
School resourcing key dates 2025
School responsibilities for bus safety and behaviour management
School strike notification
School term dates and holidays
School terms and holidays dates
School transport advisors contacts
School transport assistance
School transport assistance (for education professionals)
School transport assistance - parents and caregivers
School transport assistance eligibility and applications
School transport contacts
School transport drivers must:
School transport for directly resourced schools
School transport regional contacts
School transport roles and responsibilities guide
School transport specialist equipment
School visits counted towards the attendance will be recorded on the attendance record.
School year and terms length
School zones and enrolment schemes
School zones and enrolment schemes - information for parents
School's more than just class
School-related complaints
School-to-school exchanges
School-to-school exchanges are direct partnerships between a New Zealand school and a school overseas.
School-to-school student exchanges additional application form
School-to-school student exchanges: Application for approval
School-to-school student exchanges: MoU template
Schools also have access to the RTLB service. RTLB are specialist
Schools and EPOs are required to provide pastoral care for both all exchange students in line with the Education (Pastoral Care of Tertiary and International Learners) Code of Practice 2021 (the Code).
Schools and kura have many resources and tools they can access to support learners, including our learning support team.
Schools and kura must be open for instruction for a specified number of half days each year. If a one-off issue means you cannot meet this minimum requirement, contact your regional office.
Schools and kura must be open for:
Schools and kura must meet the requirements of Privacy Principle 5 of the Privacy Act by keeping student and staff personal information secure.
Schools and kura will be provided with year-end payroll information in early February each year. This will assist with the preparation of the annual financial statements.
Schools and parents are legally responsible for making sure students attend school every day.
Schools and teacher statistics
Schools and the Code of Health and Disability Services Consumers' Rights
Schools annual reporting webinar
Schools are expected to apply government procurement rules when using public money. The New Zealand Government Procurement website has more detail about what a conflict of interest is and how to manage it.
Schools are responsible for confirming that a student meets the rules for an eligibility transfer.
Schools are responsible for providing us with up-to-date data about students who use our bus services to get to school.
Schools are responsible for telling students, parents and caregivers if any changes are made to their school bus service.
Schools can also rely on confirmation from tertiary education organisations when hosting their students.
Schools can refer to the list of panel members to find project managers or project administrators available in their region.
Schools can report incidents through either:
Schools continue to comply with the 2024 Open and Closing regulations. Updated guidance outlining what we consider open for instruction to mean, the closing for instruction settings, and regulatory requirements will be available on this website from 6 May 2025.
Schools continue to make sure teachers are recording the correct new attendance codes and that daily attendance data is checked to remove all unknown codes or errors.
Schools covering all years can determine how best to meet the requirements above.
Schools covering years 9-13 can use 2 half-days for general curriculum and assessment PLD and 2 half-days to prepare for the new curricula being implemented in 2026.
Schools do not need permission to close for emergencies. If your school needs to close due to an emergency, please contact your local Te Mahau office as soon as it is safe to do so.
Schools have flexibility to choose the start and end dates of their school year, so long as they start between Monday 26 January and Monday 9 February, and end no later than 18 December 2026.
Schools have flexibility to choose the start and end dates of their school year, so long as they start between Monday 27 January and Friday 7 February, and end no later than 19 December 2025.
Schools have flexibility to choose the start and end dates of their school year, so long as they start between Monday 29 January and Wednesday 7 February and end no later than Friday 20 December 2024.
Schools in the Ka Ora, Ka Ako Healthy School Lunches Programme
Schools may refer students to an attendance service provider if they think it may help. Attendance service staff might visit you at home to help get your child back to school.
Schools might also choose to close for local events like gala and show days, or for religious holidays in some communities.
Schools must accept out-of-zone enrolments in an order defined by the Education and Training Act 2020, using a ballot, if necessary.
Schools must have a staff member available while buses are in service
Schools must make sure students are safe on work placements.
Schools must record and report on attendance
Schools must work with transport providers and caregivers to make sure services are run safely and to manage inappropriate behaviour.
Schools needing to close for emergencies do not need to meet these criteria.
Schools or transport providers can withdraw a student's place on the school bus if the problem is serious or ongoing. They can do this temporarily or permanently.
Schools payroll remediation
Schools resourcing and ECE funding
Schools sharing common community interests should work together to set a common start date for their community.
Schools should develop and document their bus procedures to make behaviour expectations clear.
Schools should provide a safe and inclusive environment for students. Talk to your child's teacher if you are concerned about their wellbeing at school. Ask to meet with the teacher at a time convenient for them. Think about what concerns you want to discuss first.
Schools start or continue using the Stepped Attendance Response (STAR) and adapt it to their needs. Schools align policies and procedures to the new attendance rules and codes.
Schools will record absences and report them to us. This helps us to understand where more help may be needed.
Schools with Years 1 to 8
Schools with Years 7 and 8 only
Schools with Years 9 to 13
Schools with consent to assess listed standards are required to have an authenticity policy to support assessment practice. This policy must include the acceptable use of GenAI.
Schools, caregivers and transport providers must work together to make sure students can travel safely to and from school.
Schools: SESTA application
Scissors should be child-sized and have rounded ends.
Scroll down to the link for this year's annual reporting circular.
Search for 'Child Protection'.
Search the database for your local TDA.
Secondary Teachers' Collective Agreement
Secondary and composite school terms and holidays 2025 calendar
Secondary and composite school terms and holidays 2026 calendar
Secondary and composite schools must be open for instruction for a minimum of 376 half days in 2025.
Secondary and composite schools must be open for instruction for a minimum of 380 half days in 2024.
Secondary and composite schools must be open for instruction for a minimum of 380 half days in 2026.
Secondary and intermediate schools:
Secondary schools are continuing to use the updated Achievement Standards and support materials for NCEA assessments.
Secondary schools need to open for slightly fewer days per year than primary and intermediate schools. They may close earlier at the end of the year.
Secretary can authorise the inclusion of a grandparenting scheme
Section 10 of the Education and Training Act 2020 defines a playgroup as a group that meets on a regular basis to facilitate children's play and in respect of which:
Section 10 of the Education and Training Act 2020 defines an early childhood education and care centre as a premises that is used regularly for the education or care of 3 or more children (not being children of the persons providing the education or care or children enrolled at a school who are being provided with education or care before or after school) under the age of 6 years by day (or part of a day) but not for any continuous period of more than 7 days.
Section 10 of the Education and Training Act 2020 defines home-based ECE services as the provision of education or care, for gain or reward, to children who are under the age of 5 years, or who are aged 5 years but not enrolled at school, in:
Section 10 of the Education and Training Act 2020 defines hospital-based education and care service as the provision of education or care to 3 or more children under the age of 6 who are receiving hospital care.
Section 3 is included in the application document below.
Section 3 of the application for this allowance must be completed and signed by a referrer. They should be someone who can explain the barriers your child is facing. There could be more than one referrer if that helps to describe your child's situation.
Section 548 of the Education and Training Act 2020
Section 548 of the Education and Training Act 2020 provides for the payment of funding to eligible early childhood services subject to conditions so that they may provide early childhood education. Services which fail to meet these conditions may no longer be eligible for funding and either all or part of this funding may be recovered by the Ministry of Education.
Section 6(a) to avoid prejudice to the security, defence, or international relations of New Zealand.
Section 6-8 works through several examples of the Frequent Absence Rule.
Section 617 of the Act currently requires the Minister of Education to issue eligibility criteria that must be met by applicants for appointment as principal.
Section 7-4 of the ECE funding handbook gives more information about notional rolls.
Section 9(2)(a) to protect the privacy of natural persons.
Section 9(2)(b)(ii) to protect the commercial position of the supplier of the information.
Section 9(2)(ba)(i) to protect information which is subject to an obligation of confidence where making the information available would likely prejudice the supply of similar information.
Section 9(2)(ba)(ii) to protect information which is subject to an obligation of confidence where making the information available would likely damage the public interest.
Section 9(2)(f)(iv) to protect the confidentiality of advice tendered by Ministers of the Crown and officials.
Section 9(2)(g)(i) to maintain the effective conduct of public affairs through the free and frank expression of opinion.
Section 9(2)(h) to maintain legal professional privilege.
Section 9(2)(j) to avoid prejudice to negotiations.
Sections under this audience
See Chapter 11-2 for all funding claim audits and record keeping information relating to early childhood education services that are eligible for Ministry of Education funding.
See Chapter 12 for information on financial reporting requirements.
See Chapter 6 of this Handbook and the relevant section for your service type (in Chapter 3) for further information on record keeping requirements.
See Page 33 of the Pacific Languages Strategy-
See Section 3-B for further information on record keeping for teacher-led services.
See Section 3-B-2: Education and Care services for information on the staff record requirements.
See Section 3-B-2a for funding conditions related to kindergartens.
See Section 4-2 for information on sharing child places and calculating 20 Hours ECE.
See Section 4-2 for the maximum FCHs for 20 Hours ECE Funding.
See Section 6-4 for more information on the absence rules.
See Section 7-7 for details on applying for an exemption.
See Section 7-7 for details on how to apply for an exemption.
See Section 7-9 for information on the EC20 transitional advance form.
See Section 8-1 for instructions on completing the RS2 Form.
See Things to consider for securing furniture that may need to be moved frequently.
See Things to consider for suggestions of other points to consider for sleep procedures.
See also funding claim audit and record audit in the Glossary.
See also the Guidance for HS12 Hazard and risk management.
See important resourcing dates for your school.
See information about digital and data programmes, strategies and policies in education.
See more information on equipment in early childhood education (ECE) services.
See new settings for how schools can close for instruction during term time.
See section 2-6 for information on funding rates.
See section 3-B-3 of the ECE funding handbook.
See section 3-B-4 for further details on the required records.
See the ACC website for more information on preventing injuries at work.
See the Glossary for definitions of casual, conditional and permanent enrolment.
See the Professional practice regarding separated parents/guardians above.
See the Professional practice regarding separated parents/guardians guide above.
See the Professional practice regarding separated parents/guardians guide under GMA2 Parent access to information, above.
See the criteria and allowance types, including how much they are.
See the full Bill on the New Zealand Legislation website.
See the licensing criteria for each type of service below:
See the published documents and advice for the Freedom of Expression Proposal.
See the published documents and advice for the Initial Teacher Education Proposal.
See the regulation for written directions.
See under books/language/music for ideas for music and dance.
Seek further advice from a healthcare professional or public health service.
Seek permission from the person who is being safety checked for the information to be shared. Permission could be sought by the person or organisation completing the safety check before it is undertaken, or by the centre/service prior to requesting the information.
Seek permission from the person who is being safety checked for the information to be shared. Permission could be sought by the person or organisation completing the safety check before it is undertaken, or by the playgroup prior to requesting the information.
Seeking approval to consult on S127 amendments and removing the NELP in ETAB No 2
Select 'Catalogue' from the top menu
Select the Physical Restraint programme tile
Select the inputs worksheet in your model and start deleting all formulas section by section.
Select view side-by-side and synchronous scrolling. Scroll down the two worksheets side-by-side to make sure each row number and description are the same is the new model.
Selecting an appropriate assembly area should also take into account where Fire and Emergency New Zealand vehicles and personnel might be when they are responding to a fire.
Selecting appropriate food for individual children is very important in minimising choking risk. It is important to discuss with a parent or caregiver the foods children can manage safely rather than relying on age alone as the indicator.
Selection and appointment processes
Self-review guidelines for early childhood education
Self-review is about looking back on the implementation of policies, procedures and practices to ensure licensing requirements are met. Self-review involves asking questions such as:
Send them home as soon as possible. Recommend that they stay at home until well again.
Send your electronic roll return file directly from your student management system (SMS).
Sending information to the ELI system
Senior management allowances are in:
Senior management allowances for secondary schools
Sensitive Claims lodgement form
Sensitive claim lodgement form
Sensitive claims contact details
Sensitive claims of abuse in state schools
Sensitive claims of abuse in state schools before 1989
Sensitive claims of abuse in state schools' process
Separate accounts for everyday usage and administrator tasks
Separate accounts for everyday use and administrator tasks
Service closes over the Christmas period.
Service closure temporary reason.
Service continues to operate as normally organised over the Christmas period.
Service information collected
Service must keep evidence that a parent or guardian of each child has regularly examined and confirmed the attendance record. This needs to be completed once a week.
Service must keep evidence that a parent or guardian of each child has regularly examined and confirmed the attendance record. This needs to be completed:
Service profile information (removed April 2015): 9-1
Service provider documentation for Regulation 28(2)(c)
Service providers could hold meetings to convey information about the service, for example:
Service providers could hold meetings to convey information about the service.
Service providers may want to consider having a process in place for when educators leave the service to ensure that information relating to enrolment records is no longer held by the educator but is kept by the service provider.
Service providers, umbrella organisations and
Service staff require guidelines and opportunities for training to further develop their knowledge and understanding of:
Service type specific funding
Service type specific information
Service type specific information is identified at the top of the page. Service types are:
Services affiliated to a school
Services are eligible to claim the ECE Funding Subsidy for up to 6 FCHs per child-place per day, to a maximum of 30 FCHs per child-place per week (that is 7 days).
Services are eligible to claim up to 6 hours per child per day, to a maximum of 20 hours per child per week.
Services are expected to maintain a list of trained relievers who are available when trained parents/
Services are not required to offer the terms of the Kindergarten Teachers, Head Teachers and Senior Teachers' Collective Agreement.
Services are required to contact the Ministry if there is any subsequent drop in the use of the main language or if there are changes to the cultural nature of the education programme provided.
Services are required to keep other information on enrolment records for health and safety purposes. Please see the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008 or contact your Ministry local office for further details.
Services are required to provide children under 2 years with the opportunity to have restful sleep at any time they are attending the centre.
Services are required to provide evidence to support the numbers claimed on the EC20 form. This could be in the form of actual enrolment and attendance numbers.
Services are required to report on how government funds have been spent as a condition of their licence.
Services are required to report to parents and the local community about how they have spent their Equity Funding.
Services are required to submit a record of the number of discretionary hours they have used in a funding period to the Ministry.
Services can be licensed to provide both teacher-led and parent-led education and care during any week, but only one kind of provision on each day.
Services can opt out of the scheme. To opt out, contact us.
Services can record sleep in a variety of ways. These include:
Services cannot be funded on a notional roll and claim funding for normal funded child hours (FCHs) generated.
Services connected to ELI submit their RS7 Return electronically via ELI Web or their Student Management System (SMS).
Services could have more than one designated sleeping space. All criteria must be met for any and all designated sleep spaces. In mixed age settings, many services choose to use their designated space(s) for children of all ages (not just under 2s), because they find supervision easier when all children sleep in the same place.
Services do not need to apply for a change of funding rate. This will be automatically calculated by the Ministry when they submit their RS7 return each funding round.
Services do not need to provide additional information.
Services funded on a notional roll claim their full notional roll figure for each day of operation, instead of entering their actual funded child hours on their RS7 Return. This means that services on a notional roll do not apply the Frequent Absence Rule when claiming funding.
Services funded on a notional roll must keep the same records (e.g. enrolment records, attendance records and staff records) as other services (see Chapter 11 Record keeping).
Services funded on notional rolls receive the same funding rates as other services. They do not receive additional funding (except where eligible for equity funding).
Services have regard for the National Education and Learning Priorities
Services have until 30 June each year to send the Ministry their audited financial reports for the previous financial year.
Services may be funded 20 hours ECE (20 hours ECE hours and plus 10 ECE hours) for up to 6 FCHs per child per day, to a maximum of 30 FCHs per child per week.
Services may be funded the ECE funding subsidy (Under 2 and 2 and over) for up to 6 FCHs per child-place per day, to a maximum of 30 FCHs per child-place per week.
Services may begin claiming 20 Hours ECE funding for a child on their third birthday.
Services may choose how they report to their community on the spending of this funding. This can be done by detailing the information in a newsletter, a notice displayed at the service or by publishing their annual financial reports.
Services may choose to develop a healthy food and drink policy with
Services may choose to keep a higher indoor temperature but should ensure that is comfortable for children. Having a service temperature that is too warm could lead to lethargy.
Services may claim a maximum of:
Services may claim funding for all sessions/days a child was enrolled to attend, but was absent from, within a three week period. The three week period begins on the first day of absence.
Services may claim funding for all the sessions/days a child was enrolled to attend, but was absent from, within a 12-week period. The 12-week period begins on the first day of absence.
Services may display posters which encourage healthy foods and demonstrate how to prepare foods to meet the developmental needs of
Services may have funding withheld if they do not complete the financial reporting requirements.
Services may have their funding withheld if they fail to meet the audit requirements.
Services may provide the healthy food and drink guidance to
Services may request donations
Services may want to consider how information is shared so it is culturally appropriate for the audience. Things to consider include:
Services must allow reasonable opportunities for parents to review their decisions regarding optional charges. Either party may initiate a change to the agreement and any changes must be documented in accordance with record keeping requirements. One-off optional charges are agreed at the time parents are asked by the service.
Services must also keep evidence (e.g. a signed attendance register) that a parent/guardian of each child has regularly examined and confirmed the attendance record.
Services must comply with the standards set in the licensing criteria as well as the requirements of the Health & Safety at Work Act 2015 (HSWA) and its regulations. Additional guidance about the HSWA is available for early learning services.
Services must comply with the standards set in the licensing criteria as well as the requirements of the Health and Safety at Work Act 2015 (HSWA) and its regulations. Additional guidance about the HSWA is available for early learning services.
Services must ensure that licence maximums are not exceeded when children are attending a make-up day.
Services must ensure that the activity or item offered exceeds/is over and above what is required by regulation.
Services must have a child protection policy that meets the Children's Act 2014 requirements.
Services must have a procedure so people know how to make a complaint about any instance of non-compliance, and this must include the option for people to contact their regional Ministry of Education office, with the appropriate contact details.
Services must keep a paper copy of any changes to enrolment records which are held electronically. This will enable changes to be signed by parents/guardians.
Services must keep a record of how they have used Targeted Funding. Details on how Targeted Funding was used must be provided at the individual service level.
Services must keep a separate enrolment agreement for each child.
Services must keep records of fees, donations, optional charges and home-based educator top up payments received from parents.
Services must keep records to demonstrate persons responsible hold a current practising certificate.
Services must keep records to demonstrate persons responsible hold both an early childhood qualification recognised by the Teaching Council of Aotearoa New Zealand for registration purposes and a current practising certificate.
Services must keep the following documentation:
Services must make the policy and information about its practices available to parents (GMA2 Information provided to parents).
Services must make the policy and information about its practices available to parents as required by criterion GMA2 Parent access to information.
Services must not charge fees for hours that they claim as 20 Hours ECE. If a service claims 20 Hours ECE funding under an absence rule, the service must not charge fees for any conditional or casual child who directly fills that place. If the service charges a fee, it must claim the ECE Funding Subsidy.
Services must not claim funding for absences that continue into the fourth week and beyond.
Services must not offer 20 Hours ECE only:
Services must not state that a child has attended an early childhood service when they did not attend for any reason.
Services must not state that a child:
Services must promote the Ministry of Health Guidance and may demonstrate compliance by developing formal policies and procedure in partnership with
Services must provide a copy of the Ministry of Health Guidance at the time of enrolment and should record on the enrolment form that this information has been provided and understood by parents.
Services must provide a copy of the Ministry of Health guidance at the time of enrolment and should record on the enrolment form that this information has been provided and understood by parents.
Services must provide evidence to support their claim. This could be in the form of actual enrolment and attendance numbers.
Services must provide these documents to the Ministry or its Resourcing Auditors on request.
Services must record the hours covered by Other Teachers as Other Teacher Hours on the Staff Record and Staff Hour Count for breaks/absences over 15 minutes.
Services must report directly to parents and the local community on how they spend their equity funding.
Services must report on the ATIS as part of their financial reporting on the ECE Funding Subsidy.
Services must send their audit reports to the Ministry along with their audited general purpose financial statements or audited special purpose financial report.
Services must spend Targeted Funding in the funding period it was allocated.
Services must use Targeted Funding in line with the requirements specified in the Targeted Funding guidelines.
Services must use the Staff Record to manage the Staff Hour Count.
Services need a process to ensure that enrolment forms are checked by parents at least annually to ensure all enrolment details are up to date. It is good practice to have enrolment forms checked more often if possible
Services need to ensure the required documentation as outlined in the governance, management and administration criteria is made available when required.
Services not connected to ELI, send their RS7 Return by post, using the paper-based RS7 Return sent to them by the Ministry.
Services not eligible for ATIS include:
Services of all types will be audited to verify the accuracy of their funded child hour entitlement claims including record keeping requirements for 20 Hours ECE.
Services offering 20 Hours ECE must offer 20 Hours ECE to all eligible children.
Services offering 20 hours ECE
Services on a notional roll are funded on average actual attendance for a specified period. The Ministry's initial calculation of average actual attendance is based on past RS7 Returns.
Services participating in the KidsCan ECE Food for Kids Programme are not required to register food control plans with MPI. This is because registration is required when food is purchased and sold. KidsCan donate the food to early learning services and there is no charge to families.
Services provide their RS7 Return to Ministry as follows:
Services receiving quality level funding must keep:
Services receiving quality level funding must maintain a record of trained parents/
Services receiving the Annual Top-Up for Isolated Services (ATIS) must report this as part of their income. They do not need to report how it was spent.
Services receiving the PITA must keep the following documentation:
Services recognised by the Ministry of Education have to be licensed or certified. They are not Government-owned in the way that state schools are.
Services risk losing funding if their records cannot be audited because they are unclear or ambiguous, or are not available for audit.
Services seeking Equity Funding under Component C: Language and culture other than English (including sign language) must complete this form.
Services seeking an exemption from the absence rules for a child with special and/or health needs must complete this form.
Services seeking an exemption from the absence rules must complete an EC12 form (and EC13 form where applicable).
Services set their own fee structures, so you'll need to check with the services you are interested in.
Services should be familiar with the obligations of the Privacy Act and understand the 12 information privacy principles dealing with collecting, holding, use and disclosure of personal information.
Services should be familiar with the obligations of the Privacy Act and understand the 12 information privacy principles dealing with collecting, holding, use and disclosure of personal information. Information on this can be found at the Privacy Commissioner website.
Services should budget to ensure funds are available to cover the period between starting to operate and receiving their first payment.
Services should check with any potential manufacturer/supplier that a certificate of compliance is available before purchase (for example, a certificated manufacturer may have added a new piece of equipment to its range since certification and the new product may not comply with NZS 5828:2015).
Services should consider children with additional needs.
Services should consider having a process whereby the enrolment records are collected or delivered to the service provider every 3 months (or after each funding period). This minimises the likelihood of loss or damage.
Services should demonstrate the visibility of the principles, strands, goals, and learning outcomes of their chosen pathway within their documentation i.e., policies, curriculum documentation, engagements with parents and
Services should develop a procedure with parents/
Services should ensure that:
Services should maintain a list of certificated relievers who are available when certificated teachers are absent.
Services should not be penalised if they are unaware that an absent child will not be returning to the service. However, the Ministry cannot fund absences indefinitely.
Services should report on each category of funding received from the Ministry.
Services that are required to keep a Staff Hour Count (education and care services, hospital-based services and all-day kindergartens), will also be audited on:
Services that believe they have received less than their full ATIS entitlement should contact their service provider.
Services that decide to stop offering 20 Hours ECE funding should contact the ECE Operational Funding team on
Services that do not operate for a continuous period of 2 weeks or more may claim funding for enrolled children who are absent before and after the break.
Services that do not operate for a period of two weeks or more may extend the Frequent Absence rule where a child has already been frequently absent in the previous month.
Services that fail to provide the above records on request may be returned to standard funding rates.
Services that keep only electronic records for recording attendance must use a software package or other electronic means of recording attendance that has provision for noting and referencing any changes in a manner that is transparent for staff, parents and the Ministry.
Services that must complete the Staff Hour Count may record the hours worked by relievers who are Other Teachers as Certificated Teacher Hours for the purposes of the Staff Hour Count for up to 80 hours during the funding cycle.
Services that offer 20 Hours ECE to all eligible children must ensure all hours for children covered by 20 Hours ECE have no charge.
Services that opt in can access higher funding rates for paying their certificated teachers at or above certain minimum salary steps. There are 4 minimum salary scales. We fund services the funding rates that are in line with their chosen salary scale.
Services that submit paper-based RS7 or use ELI Web and have used discretionary hours during a funding period, must submit the report found at the following link along with their RS7.
Services that use an approved student management system (SMS) please contact your SMS provider if you require assistance in providing this information.
Services that wish to apply for a recalculation of their advance funding should contact the ECE Operational Funding team on
Services where cooked meals for children are prepared are likely to need more fully equipped kitchen facilities than services where children provide their own food. However, all services must meet the requirements set out in this criterion.
Services who do not plan to use vehicles for evacuating children in the case of a tsunami should still practice the tsunami drill as per their procedure and in line with their services emergency plan (HS4).
Services who do not plan to use vehicles for evacuating children in the case of a tsunami should still practice the tsunami drill as per their procedure and in line with their services emergency plan (HS7).
Services who do not provide this information to the Ministry through the ELI system or an approved alternative method may have their funding withheld in part or in full.
Services will be audited on
Services will need to develop a process which supports staff to ascertain how a relationship between separated parents and the service may be established so that communication channels can be opened. This could include ensuring educators have a copy of the enrolment form, so they are clear what any court orders are.
Services will need to ensure those involved in the creation of the annual plan are familiar with priorities 1 to 6 of the NELP.
Services will need to indicate whether a child is receiving 20 Hours ECE, any agreements by parents/caregivers to pay optional charges, and that the attestation section and home-based educator top up payment section (where relevant) of the enrolment form has been completed by the parents/caregivers.
Services will still need to comply with early learning regulatory requirements and funding conditions.
Services with an EQI of 2, 3, 4 or 5+ are eligible for a review of their EQI, provided certain conditions are met.
Services with an EQI of 2, 3, 4 or 5+ are eligible to apply for a review of their EQI if they are able to provide evidence that:
Services with an income of less than $80,000 will not have to provide audited financial reports. Services with an income of more than $80,000 will still have to provide audited financial reports.
Session 1: Preparing your school trial balance for export
Session 2: Import and map your school trial balance for the first
Session 3: Populating the trial balance converter in kiwi park
Session 4: Populating the inputs worksheet manually
Session 5: Quality checking the financial statements
Session 6: Reviewing the statement of cash flow
Session 7: How to hide rows and notes not required by your school
Session 8: Collating and uploading your annual report subtitles
Sessional education and care services and hospital-based services - Base funding rates
Sessional education and care services and hospital-based services - Extended parity funding rates
Sessional education and care services and hospital-based services - Full parity funding rates
Sessional education and care services and hospital-based services - Parity funding rates
Sessional services operating a session of 2.5 to 3 hours will receive funding for 3 hours.
Sessional services that offer 2.5 hour sessions may claim funding for 3 hours for those sessions.
Sessional teacher-led centre-based services.
Sessional-100% certificated teachers
Set a password policy for Google or Microsoft accounts
Set a password policy on your devices
Set up least privilege with Google Workspace
Set up least privilege with Microsoft
Set up least privilege with other systems
Set up of the environment
Sets of high-quality plastic creatures for example, domestic animals, dinosaurs, sea creatures
Setting up a school-to-school exchange programme
Setting up a separate area
Setting up new NCEA Pacific subjects, including Gagana Tokelau and Vagahau Niue
Several recent reviews and inquiries have found that, despite significant investment in learning support, many disabled learners and children and young people with learning support needs are not having their needs adequately met by the education system. So many of these children and young people are not achieving equitable educational outcomes.
Shade the boxes to show when each adult will actually be working with the children.
Shane is absent on Monday. This means Aroha can attend for the day from 9:00am to 5:00pm.
Shane is permanently enrolled to attend from 8:00am to 5:00pm Monday through Friday.
Sharing of personal information in early learning services
Sharing personal information to protect children
Sharing personal information to protect children in early learning
Sharing personal information with the Teaching Council
Sharing the information we collect
Sharing your phonics data
Short form agreement for consultant engagement template
Short form agreement guidance
Short form model conditions of engagement agreement
Should all seniors be marked X from the first day
Sign in/Sign out template
Sign in/sign out template
Simple, short passwords are easy to guess.
Since November 2022, we have been contacting all former employees entitled to a payment via the following methods.
Single Data Returns (SDRs) for providers that receive Government funding
Single-sex schools or schools that offer specific sports or other programmes are not considered special character schools.
Sink with hot water connection
Sione currently attends Huia Playcentre from 8:00am to 11:00am on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays.
Sione has attended for fewer than 4 hours a day on more than half of his enrolled days in November.
Sione is enrolled to attend an early childhood centre for 4 hours a day on Monday, Wednesday and Friday.
Six priorities to improve achievement
Skipping class. So truet really is, um, it really is
Sleep furniture spacing at early learning services
Slings, backpacks, prams, buggies and car capsules
Small hard foods that are difficult for children to bite or chew (for example, nuts, large seeds, popcorn husks, raw carrot, apple, celery)
So I just wanted to outline that for those that may be, um,
So I spoke, you know, myself
So I think it's kind of a case by case basis for that,
So I think that will come up at board level around
So I would assume that if you are, uh, tagging along
So I'm not sure what GTP is.
So before we start, I would, um,
So daily reporting of attendance data becomes next year.
So first off, if you have, uh,
So for example, if you were traveling from the west coast
So for example, if you're sitting there thinking, okay,
So have there been any changes
So if the board decided that that was actually a, um,
So if you could delineate those in the decision trade,
So if you look at present that out of class,
So it could be an N which is a present code.
So it is purely about, um, mark, uh, Tina and Jared
So it's just about the school, um, process, um,
So let's kick into it. Okay.
So let's look at these in some detail.
So let's we'll progress through them,
So myself and, um, some very talented others, um, we
So practice for NZQA, uh, exams would be
So question mark truant, um, explained but not approved
So rural schools, when students go with whanau
So that would be a, a decode for the student who,
So that would be, um, around how the school manages,
So that's an e it's an e it's a explained, not approved.
So the V code is for, um, and it's for study leave
So the X code isn't reported to the ministry
So the absence, um, an attempt has been made
So the last day of school.
So the question from Catherine,
So there definitely is provision for, um, you know,
So there, the codes that are in school policy are
So therefore, we have labeled this explained and approved.
So they could be on a transition plan, um,
So this is, um, yeah, as you can see here, this is, uh,
So we had enough to create a start for 10.
So we listened. So we, we kept that in.
So we've done exactly that.
So we've got a, um, follow up comment from Tanya,
So we, we went from 26, we've now got 15,
So what we do with the daily reporting,
So what we have here is a table that demonstrates
So what we've got here is a very easy
So when you are having follow up with the whanau
So with that said, I will stop sharing.
So with that said, everything else was up for grabs.
So yeah, a decode is, is a half day, um, code
So you'd have that in your policy or your processes.
So, so everything is, we're dealing in the gray
So, uh, not using anything outside of that.
So, um, and that's, uh, been launched this year, um,
So, um, definitely want the this to be present,
So, um, it would've to become either a T
So, um, you kind of mark them present for that class.
Social media and online wellbeing
Social media plays a big part in the lives of many young people. It's a useful tool for learning and staying in touch with other people but can sometimes present risks to your child's wellbeing and self-esteem. Before letting your child get started with using social media, make sure you communicate with your child about on the online safety basics.
Social media sites may occasionally become unavailable. The Ministry of Education can't accept responsibility for lack of service due to downtime.
Social media terms of use
Social worker employed by DSW or the board.
Soft furnishings. The softer furnishings you have, the more sound is absorbed. Some practical options are:
Some ECE services have significantly different operating models and erratic patterns of enrolment and/or attendance due to their special function in the community.
Some are community-based and some are privately owned. This means there is a lot of variation in how these services are provided.
Some centres (especially those without administration staff) choose to divert incoming calls to an answer phone during particular times of the day, to minimise the interruptions to staff while they are working with children. This is a matter of choice, but checking messages at regular points through the day to ensure that urgent or important information from parents is received is recommended.
Some centres accept babies from birth until they start primary school. Others only take older children. This information will be available on a centre's website or by contacting them.
Some centres will supply formula for your baby. If they do, you have to agree on the brand and type of formula.
Some change facilities require educators to engage in excessive heavy lifting, hunching over or kneeling. This may result in sprains or strains, so educators need to be mindful of how to manage this.
Some district health boards (DHBs) have their own specific requirements. You will need to contact your local DHB for clarification.
Some early childhood services choose to follow the school terms and holidays. Full-time daycare services are usually open through the school holidays but close over Christmas. Check with your service.
Some early learning services are open during the school holidays. Other types, like Playcentres and some kindergartens, are closed during the school holidays.
Some early learning services offer parenting information and courses for families and the wider community. These courses can be about a wide range of parent and child topics such as developing social competence and language development.
Some early learning services provide food for your child and formula for your baby. Others will ask you to pack meals and snacks for your child each day. You will find this information when you visit or enrol at your centre, or on their website.
Some equipment, such as puzzles, will have specific uses, while some will be chosen for their flexibility of use, for example, blocks that can be used to build roads, houses or form patterns. Children will also need equipment available to help them develop new skills or practice newly established ones, for example, scissors or balls.
Some examples of cyberbullying include creating false online profiles, posting abusive comments or embarrassing pictures or videos, and sending harmful text messages. It's likely this behaviour is happening both at school and outside of school grounds.
Some examples of extended non-operation where the Frequent Absence Rule can be suspended are:
Some examples of extended non-operation where the Three Week Rule can be suspended are:
Some examples of planning documentation are available to download in the Criteria section.
Some examples or nuance scenarios.
Some facilities that can be located outside the premises, if services can demonstrate they have adequate access to them. For example, 2 separate ECE services located in the same building can share the same centrally located adult toilet, workspace, art sink and bodywash facilities.
Some groups use the following types of play as a starting point to make sure they provide a variety of equipment, experiences and opportunities:
Some home-based service providers have a range of equipment and resources available for educators to loan and educators may belong to toy libraries.
Some homes may have a dishwasher that can be used. If the home does not have a dishwasher and the educator washes dishes by hand the Ministry of Health recommends a hygienic method of hand washing dishes is followed:
Some homes may have open plan kitchens and there are likely to be times when children will need to access kitchen and cooking facilities to take part in supervised activities, such as cooking and food preparation.
Some injuries, illnesses and accidents must be notified to specified agencies under separate legislation. Services should familiarise themselves with their wider obligations to notify these agencies.
Some issues to consider are:
Some local councils also run school buses in urban areas.
Some of the key actions we are continuing are
Some of the key actions we have started are
Some of the key actions we will start are:
Some of the proposed changes in ETAB 2 include:
Some of these decision-making processes will take longer than others. This means that some materials delivered to the ministers may be about items that stay under active consideration and take longer for us to share.
Some of these will be more formal as in the case of regular monthly meetings and others will be less formal as in meeting over a shared meal or coffee. As well, you may want to display information on notice boards or use surveys and questionnaires to gain information.
Some older children may be non-verbal, what appropriate strategies and teaching practices do we have to support them to make choices within our curriculum?
Some other organisations may supply a Police vet as part of safety checking a children's worker. This may be tertiary training providers and relief teacher agencies.
Some overseas teachers may be able to have teaching experience recognised as a qualification. The Teaching Council has more information.
Some playgroups may choose to provide an infant specific area. Talk to your regional education advisor about different ways to do this.
Some playgroups may have more specific purposes like promoting language and cultural values.
Some playgroups use a newsletter or wall chart to encourage parents to follow these guidelines and take responsibility.
Some practical examples are:
Some practical options are:
Some reporting areas of general purpose financial statements and special purpose audit reports can be consolidated for services that are grouped into a service provider for funding purposes.
Some schools and kura have enrolment schemes. This means only students who live in a specific area around the school are guaranteed a place.
Some schools have enrolment schemes. Only students who live in a specific area around the school are guaranteed a place.
Some schools organise their own school buses. They may have their own rules for how their service work.
Some service operators find bleach unpleasant to work with and seek out alternative products. If you or your cleaning provider wish to use an alternative disinfectant, you must have scientific evidence (from the manufacturer) that it is effective for its intended purpose.
Some services are in low-lying coastal areas and therefore would be required to evacuate if there was a tsunami warning. Some of these services may have an evacuation procedure that requires the use of vehicles to get as many children as possible to high ground quickly. It is not expected that these services practice the tsunami drill to the full extent by overloading vehicles with children and travelling to the designated safe space as this is illegal in normal circumstances and poses unnecessary risk to children. These services should still practice their tsunami drill and include children as far as practicably possible, for example, drill may include a process that facilitates the movement of children to the proposed exit point as quickly as possible in preparation for getting children into planned evacuation vehicles.
Some services are in low-lying coastal areas and therefore would be required to evacuate if there was a tsunami warning. Some of these services may have an evacuation procedure that requires the use of vehicles to get children to high ground as quickly as possible. It is not expected that these services practice the tsunami drill to the full extent by loading vehicles with children and travelling to the designated safe space as this may pose unnecessary risk to children. These services should still practice their tsunami drill and include children as far as practicably possible, for example, drill may include a process that facilitates the movement of children to the proposed exit point as quickly as possible in preparation for getting children into planned evacuation vehicle/s.
Some services have a particular language and cultural focus. For example,
Some services use a device such as a traffic light that indicates when noise volumes are too high, and children can be reminded to lower the noise levels.
Some support is available for children with
Some systems have RBAC groups or templates that can be created to make assigning permissions easier.
Some things that your group will need to consider:
Some universities have entry pathways specifically for homeschooled students.
Sometimes applications are unsuccessful. If that happens, you will receive a letter from us. You can then contact us to discuss your application further.
Sometimes centres/services use relief teachers to cover short-term staff absences. These people must be safety checked.
Sometimes changes are made by the Minister of Education or us to manage growth or decline in state schools or
Sometimes children at the centre will need to have all or part of their bodies washed. This might be necessary, for example:
Sometimes children at the home will need to have all or part of their bodies washed. This might be necessary, for example:
Sometimes it might be the staff that notice something first. If they notice any hearing, vision or other health issues, they may suggest that you take your child for a Well Child check.
Sometimes students who aren't eligible can use the school bus if the transport provider allows it. Criteria need to be met for this to happen. These students may have to pay a fare.
Sometimes there can be value in observing a child and educator away from the home setting, for example at playgroups. However, services must note the following conditions:
Sometimes we need to keep the identity of a complainant confidential. We will contact the complainant to let them know if we are investigating.
Sometimes, first aid training is difficult to access for new educators working for a licensed home-based service provider. This could be because they are geographically isolated or an unexpected event means they cannot get to planned training. This does not apply to existing educators who are renewing their first aid qualification.
Sometimes, some or all of the B4 School Check may take place at the early learning service.
Sometimes, your child may be in a group of children of a similar age. In others, they will be with a mix of ages.
Sorry, my color on my screen's just got funny.
Sorry. Yeah, so the, um, for the student attending,
Sound of Ministry of Education jingle in the background.
South Canterbury Free Kindergarten Association
South Otago Free Kindergarten Association Incorporated
Southbase Construction Limited.
Southern Cross Cultural Exchange
Southern Cross Educational Enterprises
Southland Free Kindergarten Association
Space is available for children aged 2 and older to sleep or rest for a reasonable period of time each day. If the space used for sleeping or resting is part of the activity space, there are alternative activity spaces for children not sleeping or resting as necessary.
Space is available for children aged 2 and older to sleep or rest for a reasonable period of time each day. If the space used for sleeping or resting is part of the activity space, there are alternative activity spaces for other children not sleeping or resting as necessary.
Speak first to the school's principal, then to the school board.
Special activities for infants might include:
Special activities for toddlers
Special character school does not mean single-sex schools or schools that offer specific sports or other programmes that your child may want to attend.
Special character schools
Special edition School and Early Learning Bulletins were sent on Friday 31 May 2024.
Special purpose financial report
Special purpose financial statements
Special requests or needs
Specialised School Transport Assistance (SESTA)
Specialist equipment funding
Specific considerations should include the following:
Specific sounds or the absence of them may signify reason for concern and alert an educator to signs of potential danger.
Specifically, any child who becomes unwell while attending the service or receiving out-of-school care is kept at a safe distance from other children (to minimise the spread of infection) and returned to the care of a parent or other person authorised to collect the child without delay.
Speech intelligibility, disturbance of information extraction, message communication
Sponsors have greater flexibility in teaching, curriculum, governance, hours and days of operation, and funding, with the aim of achieving greater innovation in learning.
Spraying and wiping cots, beds and mattresses with a suitable cleaning agent is needed before storage.
Spread through different routes including coughing, sneezing, faecal-oral route
Staff (either paid or unpaid) who are only on the premises or involved in administration do not count towards eligibility.
Staff and volunteers should be able to confidently and knowledgeably:
Staff employed or engaged in the service, in conjunction with the appraiser, identify specific and measurable goals, and progress towards achieving these is monitored through documented observations, conversations and ongoing feedback.
Staff enrolled in a course of study that will result in a recognised ECE teaching qualification within 12 months
Staff must get their first aid qualification from a training provider accredited by the New Zealand Qualifications Authority (NZQA).
Staff protection and child protection policies need to be kept in mind.
Staff record requirements
Staff record verification sheet template
Staff required for your service to meet the minimum regulatory requirements for staff:child ratios.
Staff should know who the person responsible is at any one time and be able to provide this information to parents on request
Staff space does not have to be located within the licensed premises, but it does need to be situated nearby.
Staff start and end dates in role at service.
Staff start and end dates working at service.
Staff will call an ambulance if an injury is serious.
Staff will want to know all about your child. This will be both practical information like sleep routines, food preferences, allergies and whether they are toilet trained, but also more personal things like their interests and how they like being comforted.
Staff/educators should be able to confidently:
Staffing schedules support the smooth operation of an ECE service.
Staffing transfer agreements
Stakeholder research informing the Cabinet Paper and Work Programme (October 2022)
Stand-downs, suspensions, exclusions and expulsions from school
Start and end date of enrolment.
Start and end date of service temporary closure.
Start by reminding yourself about what it is you are trying to achieve (go back to
Start no later than Saturday 19 December 2026 and run for 5 or 6 weeks (from school's closing date until opening date of school the following year).
Start no later than Saturday 20 December 2025 and run for 5 or 6 weeks (from school's closing date until opening date of school the following year).
Start with an informal discussion
Starting an early learning service
Starting in early learning
Starting school as part of a group has lots of benefits for children. They often feel less anxious and settle more quickly when they start together with other new children.
Starts between Monday 26 January and Monday 9 February and ends Thursday 2 April 2026 (78-96 half days).
Starts between Monday 27 January and Friday 7 February and ends Friday 11 April 2025 (92-108 half days).
Starts between Monday 29 January and Wednesday 7 February and ends Friday 12 April 2024 (90-102 half days).
State and state-integrated schools and kura can choose to start and end their school year between these dates:
State and state-integrated schools and kura must close on:
State and state-integrated schools began using a different set of attendance codes from Term 1 2025.
State schools are government-owned and funded.
State schools that have an enrolment scheme must follow an out-of-zone pre-enrolment process.
State, state-integrated and private schools
State, state-integrated, schools and
State-integrated schools annual financial statements guidance
State-integrated schools are schools that have a special character. They generally have a philosophical or religious belief as part of their school programme. If your child attends one of these, it must be the closest school of its type for them to qualify for transport assistance. For example, the closest Catholic school if Catholic education is chosen.
State-integrated schools are schools with a special character. They are funded by the government and teach the national curriculum. They have their own sets of aims and objectives to reflect their own particular values and are set within a specific philosophy or religion. You will pay compulsory attendance dues.
State-integrated schools have to make specific disclosures in their financial statements. Read our guidance for the details.
Statement of KiwiSport funding.
Statement of National Education and Learning Priorities (NELP)
Statement of National Education and Learning Priorities 2020
Statement of accounting policies
Statement of changes in net assets/equity.
Statement of compliance with employment policy.
Statement of comprehensive revenue and expense.
Statement of financial performance (profit and loss account)
Statement of financial position (balance sheet)
Statement of financial position.
Statement of movement in equity
Statement of responsibility signed and dated.
Statistics New Zealand's Data Explorer includes census information, ethnicity and age.
Step 1 - 6: Parity funding rates. Band determined by the service's certificated ratio.
Step 1: Base funding rates. Band determined by the service's certificated ratio.
Step 1: Daily certificated teacher hours
Step 1: Sessional example
Step 2: Daily other teacher hours
Step 2: Sessional example
Step 3: Monthly certificated teacher hours
Step 4: Monthly other teacher hours
Step 5: Complete the rest of the RS7 return
Stepped Attendance Response - STAR
Stepped attendance response (STAR)
Stepped attendance response - STAR
Steps for setting up services, useful website links, and other handy resources are available to all groups on the Ministry website. For information about the Early Learning Information System (ELI) or the electronic submission of RS7 returns, please visit Early Learning Information or contact your Ministry regional office for further details.
Stomach pain, fever, nausea, diarrhoea and/or vomiting
Storage space is needed for the variety of indoor and outdoor equipment and resources that are required.
Strategic plans are best developed in consultation with all stakeholders, for example
Strategic plans are best developed in consultation with all stakeholders, for example parents/
Strategic plans should be regularly reviewed and modified. Progress could be recorded, perhaps on the bottom or back of the annual plan
Strategic plans should be regularly reviewed and modified. Progress could be recorded, perhaps on the bottom or back of the annual plan.
Strategies, policies and programmes
Strengthening Freedom of Speech in New Zealand's Universities
Strengthening Transmission and Maintenance
Strengthening expectations for school attendance
Strengthening initiatives to make learning environments in schools safe and inclusive.
Stretcher fabric must be taut and its wear monitored to ensure the stretcher does not sag with use over time.
Stretchers and mattresses
Strike notification period in the Education and Training Act 2020
Strong passwords are often your first line of defence against an unauthorised person gaining access to your system.
Strong relationships are formed between children and educators due to low turnover of staff.
Structure of equity funding
Structures and fences should:
Student Exchange Australia New Zealand
Student attendance: Guide for schools and kura
Students are expected to comply with the code of conduct of the transport service provider.
Students are not eligible for SESTA if they are:
Students can only receive 1 allowance at a time. They must meet specific criteria to qualify.
Students must live at least 3.2km (Years 1-8) or 4.8km (Years 9-13) from their school or kura. For accuracy and consistency, we use the mapping software ArcGIS to measure the distance over the shortest public road or pedestrian route from the home roadside gate to the school or kura front gate.
Students must meet all 3 of the following criteria to be considered for the Access Barrier Allowance:
Students must meet all three eligibility criteria to get school transport assistance.
Students should be at school all the time unless they are sick
Students studying in New Zealand in an approved exchange programme are considered domestic students for funding purposes. You cannot charge them fees.
Students who are unsuccessful are put on a waiting list in the order they were drawn in the ballot. They may be offered a place if it becomes available later in the year. The waiting list remains until the school holds its next ballot.
Study International Service New Zealand
Submit a completed application form to us.
Submit completed achievement challenges to your Director of Education for endorsement. Endorsement enables a Community of Learning to access the full range of resources available to them to support the important job of tackling the challenges.
Submit the EC30 HB to the Ministry regional office at the end of the calendar month.
Submit your annual report to us using the School Planning and Reporting Application. Guidance is available within the application.
Submit your planning and reporting documents to us using the School Planning and Reporting Application. Guidance is available within the application.
Submitting an annual report
Submitting your documents to us
Substantial collation or research is required to make the information available: section
Substitute days and hours
Substitute days and hours: 7-6
Successful teaching incentives have encouraged more people into teaching. These incentives prioritise training in specific shortage areas. In addition, overseas recruitment campaigns have been successful in attracting teachers, particularly secondary teachers in subject shortage areas.
Such conditions may include, but are not limited to:
Sudden onset of fever with cough, sore throat, muscular aches and a headache
Suggested headings for job description
Suitable human resource management practices are implemented.
Sun protection. Rain wear if needed.
Supervising adults hold one of the following combinations of training:
Supervising children using computers at the service is essential. If a centre has access to the internet (either for use with the children or in the office) consider password protection and the use of parental locks.
Supervising children using computers or iPads at your playgroup is essential. If your playgroup has access to the internet (either for use with the children or in an office) you should consider password protection and the use of parental locks.
Supervising children using computers or other electronic devices (tablets, iPads and so on) in the home is essential. If the home has access to the internet (either for use with the children or in another room) password protection and the use of parental locks should be considered.
Supervision arrangements.
Supervision is an essential component of hazard and risk management in a playgroup. Supervision must be active and focussed.
Supervision is an essential component of hazard and risk management in a service. Supervision must be active and focused.
Supervision is an essential component of hazard and risk management in a service. Supervision must be active and focussed.
Supervision is an important element in ensuring children are safe while attending the centre. The physical environment in centres needs to be designed and laid out so effective supervision is easy.
Supervision is not just watching the children. It requires focused and intentional observation of children.
Supervision is paramount in ensuring children are safe while attending the service.
Supervision of children in kitchens
Supervision on excursions
Supervision plan should include:
Supervision requirements: ECE funding handbook
Supplier performance review
Suppliers and consultants engaged on school property projects may need performance reviews.
Support Community-Led Action for Language Revitalisation and Maintenance
Support Grant for Provisionally Registered Teachers
Support for disabled children
Support for families who homeschool
Support for individual children
Support for kids who are Deaf or hard of hearing
Support for the Education Sector
Support grant for provisionally registered teachers (removed April 2015): 5-2
Support staff in a team supporting a student with restraint as part of their support plan must also complete the online module.
Support with education for children who are Deaf or hard of hearing
Support works across the system to tailor an approach depending on the needs of the child.
Support your child's wellbeing and mental health
Supporting Pacific Languages in Education will also make a significant contribution to the overall health of these languages, the vision of the
Supporting Pacific families through the Talanoa Ako programme.
Supporting resources have been developed to help schools to embed the STAR in their practice.
Supporting teachers to assess and share children's early learning progress -
Supporting volunteers/parent helpers
Supporting your child if they need extra help with their learning
Supporting your child through big milestones
Sure, mark. I was just saying we've got the first question
Surfaces need to be constructed from or sealed with moisture-impervious materials and designed in a way that minimises a build-up of dirt, food particles and bacteria, for example in corners and joins. Check surfaces regularly for signs of wear and tear, chips, scratches, loose tiles, cracked grout or worn sealant. Any of these can allow moisture to penetrate the surface and make the surface difficult to keep hygienic.
Surfaces need to be constructed from or sealed with moisture-impervious materials and designed in a way that minimises a build-up of dirt, food particles and bacteria, for example, in corners and joins. Check surfaces regularly for signs of wear and tear, chips, scratches, loose tiles, cracked grout or worn sealant. Any of these can allow moisture to penetrate the surface and make the surface difficult to keep hygienic.
Table 10: Rates for all day teacher-led home-based ECE services from 1 January 2023.
Table 12: Rates for playcentres from 1 January 2023.
Table 13: Rates for certificated playgroups and licence exempt services from 1 July 2020.
Table 14: Equity Funding rates for eligible services from 1 January 2023.
Table 15: Targeted funding for disadvantage rate for eligible services from 1 March 2023.
Table 2: Parity funding rates for all-day education and care services and hospital-based services from 1 January 2023.
Table 3: Extended parity funding rates for all-day education and care services and hospital-based services from 1 January 2023.
Table 4: Full parity funding rates for all-day education and care services and hospital-based services from 1 November 2023.
Table 5: Base funding rates for sessional education and care services and hospital-based services from 1 January 2023.
Table 6: Parity funding rates for sessional education and care services and hospital-based services from 1 January 2023.
Table 7: Extended parity funding rates for sessional education and care services and hospital-based services from 1 January 2023.
Table 8: Full parity funding rates for sessional education and care services and hospital-based services from 1 November 2023.
Table 9: Funding rates for all day and sessional Kindergartens from 1 January 2023.
Table surfaces can generally be made hygienic by spraying with a diluted bleach solution (see the guidance for HS1 Premises and contents are safe and hygienic) and then being wiped dry before use. If there is concern table surfaces are not able to be made completely hygienic through wiping, washable covers can be used as a barrier between the table and food. Covers are also a good way of showing children that the table is now an eating place rather than an activity place.
Table surfaces can generally be made hygienic by spraying with a diluted bleach solution and then being wiped dry before use. See the guidance for HS1 Premises and contents are safe and hygienic.
Tailored teaching approaches - To support teachers,
Take part in the consultation for the draft English Years 7 to 13 curriculum content.
Take the time to review the written description and maps of the proposed zones. You can share your feedback by answering the questions in this online survey.
Take things further if you want
Talk about it and make a policy
Talk about the procedures without needing to refer to any documentation.
Talk to the learning support person who works with you or ask to speak to their manager.
Talk to the school if you have concerns about bullying. This could be your child's classroom teacher or someone like a dean or the school principal. Tell them what you have heard from your child. You could also ask:
Talk to your child's early learning service for information about how they organise their days and what activities they have.
Talk to your child's teachers or healthcare provider
Talk to your early learning centre about any courses they offer, or that they know are available in the community.
Talk to your education advisor about the best way to do this in your playgroup.
Talk to your school about start dates
Talk to your school to find out what is available and if your child is eligible.
Talk to your school to see if there is a local school bus service they can use. You can also ask if they are eligible for the non-SESTA Conveyance Allowance. This is financial support for children who live far from their closest school and transport options.
Talk with regional Ministry of Education playgroup certification staff and Fire and Emergency New Zealand personnel about the best options for your particular situation.
Talk with your regional education advisor about the best way to manage nappy changing at your playgroup.
Talking points for Cabinet for Social Wellbeing Committee (EN)
Talking together - Learning in the home
Taranaki Free Kindergarten Association Incorporated
Targeted Funding cannot be used for general operating expenses or profit.
Targeted Funding for Disadvantage
Targeted Funding for Disadvantage (Targeted Funding) is a specific funding mechanism for ECE services and
Targeted Funding is a targeted funding mechanism for all licensed early learning services. Targeted Funding is paid to eligible early learning services in addition to the ECE Funding Subsidy, 20 Hours ECE and Equity Funding.
Targeted Funding is paid to eligible early learning services in addition to the ECE Funding Subsidy, 20 Hours ECE and Equity Funding.
Targeted Funding is paid to eligible early learning services in addition to the ECE Funding subsidy, 20 Hours ECE and Equity Funding.
Targeted Funding must be spent on those early learning services that generated the Targeted Funding entitlement.
Targeted Hours are the estimated number of Funded Child Hours attended by children considered to be from disadvantaged backgrounds.
Targeted funding for disadvantage
Targeted funding includes:
Targeting learning support for better achievement
Targeting learning support for better student achievement
Tari o te Kaitiaki Mana Tangata
Tauranga Regional Free Kindergarten Association Incorporated
Taxis and shuttles have different legislated requirements for child restraints. Children travelling in taxis should be restrained as if they were in a private car or van.
Taxis and shuttles have different legislative requirements for child restraints. Ensure children travelling in taxis are restrained as if they were in a private car or van.
Te Aho o Te Kura Pounamu (Te Kura
Te Aho o Te Kura Pounamu (Te Kura)
Te Aroha Free Kindergarten Association
Te Hurihanganui ($42m announced in Budget 2019). This kaupapa reboots and expands Te Kotahitanga and is being rolled out over six communities.
Te Koranikaeti ni Mwakuri ibukin Reireia Kaain te Betebeke 2023
Te Kura Rau Iti and Te Uho o Te Nikau
Te Rautaki Rawa Kura 2030
Te Rautaki Rawa Kura: The School Property Strategy 2030
Te taetae ki te kura me te whakaurunga
Te whakahaere i te Hauora me te Haumaru
Te whakapiki i te taetaenga ki te kura
Teacher Salaries Grants Revenue is set off against Learning Resources.
Teacher education lecturers and community education tutors - providing service in a teaching position while the teacher held a teaching certificate.
Teacher only days are not funded.
Teacher registration and certification ensures the quality of teachers. Newly graduated provisionally certificated teachers must be supervised and supported through an advice and guidance programme once they begin teaching in an ECE service.
Teacher training scholarship
Teacher-led centres need a certain number of qualified teachers for the number of children enrolled. Some centres choose to have more adults and more teachers per child. This may impact your choice of early learning centre.
Teacher-led education and care service
Teacher-led education and care services: 3-B-2
Teacher-led home-based ECE services
Teacher-led services (including home-based, education and care, and hospital-based services).
Teacher-led services must also keep other records listed in the table below. Home-based services have other additional requirements, depending on whether they are funded at the standard rate or the quality rate.
Teacher-led services operating on a notional roll must keep staff records, and enter the staff hour count in the usual way, calculating regulated (ratio) staff hours based on the children who actually attend.
Teacher-led services: Chapter 3
Teacher-specific staffing allowances
Teachers and any authorised supporting staff members working with a student who has restraint in their support plan must do both the online module and physical holds and releases training. This training accessed through your
Teachers and principals who are bus controllers must complete the NOVO39t form. Send this to Education Payroll at the end of each term.
Teachers are to be assessed on the highest qualification held.
Teachers can work with you to get more help for your child if it is needed. They can explain aspects of the school processes and expectations. Some schools have special learning or support coordinators that your child's teacher can refer them to. Most secondary schools have on-site counsellors.
Teachers need to be able to access the SMS, their own folders, and perhaps other folders to support their colleagues, but they don't need access to the financial system.
Teachers often have strategies or approaches they will try within the classroom that you can also support at home. Making a plan together is a good place to start.
Teachers who improve their relevant qualification(s), where their current salary rate is lower than the entry step for the new (improved) relevant qualification group, should be placed on the higher applicable entry step from the effective date of improving their relevant qualification(s).
Teaching Council Disciplinary and Competence Processes Proposal
Teaching Council certification details.
Teaching language percentages at service.
Teaching language/s at service.
Technical Support for ESL and the School Planning and Reporting Application is available from the Education Service Desk.
Technical guidance for information technology (IT leads) on how to implement the right levels of access for users, also known as the principle of least privilege.
Technology class staffing and transport for Years 7 and 8
Telling you about these reasons ensures we are fulfilling our obligation under the Act to provide a reason for the refusal. This is specified under section 19 of the Act.
Temperature in ECE activity rooms used by children
Temperature in rooms used by children
Tempering Valve A tempering valve is a safety device fitted by a plumber designed to provide water to taps at a consistently controlled temperature. It works by mixing hot and cold water between the hot water source and the outlet.
Template for assessing pay parity steps
Templates of review plans and frameworks that can be used as guides for review are also included in the appendices. A glossary and references follow at the back.
Temporary fencing forms may be appropriate if erection is stable and secure so that a child is unable to climb over or through the barrier or push the barrier over.
Tender 1 made approximately 10% of individual routes available to allow smaller regional suppliers to compete for routes.
Tender 2 was for larger transport providers and offered all remaining routes in groups.
Term 1 can start between Auckland Anniversary Day (the Monday closest to 29 January) and the day after Waitangi Day (6 February).
Term 4 must end no later than 20 December in any year.
Terms and holiday dates for state schools and kura and state-integrated schools to support school boards, administrators, principals and parents/caregivers to plan their calendars.
Terms, holidays and cohort entry dates 2025-2026
Tertiary Education Commission
Tertiary Education Commission (TEC)
Tertiary Education Strategy
Tertiary and further education
Tertiary education providers
Tertiary education providers can access the NSI system if they:
Tessa continued to push the buggy outside and back in over and over and over again. She invested a huge amount of effort and energy in the straight push, the half lift and the squatting push over and over again. Eventually she rocked the buggy in frustration and as she pushed down on the handle the front wheels lifted and it slid inside. Success at last!
Text on screen: Kiwi Park Training Module
Text on screen: Lifting aspiration and educational achievement for every New Zealander.
Th procurement officer has the primary responsibility for managing and administering the procurement. They draft all procurement documents.
Thank you for your participation in shaping the future of education in your community.
Thank you very much. Um, okay, let's crack into it.
Thank you. And Donna's also asked, how long do you keep it
Thank you. And we've got a question in
Thank you. We've got a question from Anna in the chat.
That has been a workaround that the sector have
That is a great question.
That's definitely what I learned when I spoke
That's great. Thanks, mark.
That's the mailbox at the bottom of that slide.
That's, uh, uh, not a ministry, um, decision,
The 'Teaching the Basics Brilliantly' work programme will lift student outcomes with a coherent, whole-of-pathway approach to assessment and aromatawai. This includes work underway on a new assessment and aromatawai tool for Years 3 to 10, expected to be ready for use in Term 1, 2026, and the introduction of Phonics Checks and Hihira Weteoro for children in Years 1 to 2.
The 2 main absence rules are:
The 2008 regulations require you to develop and display a statement of philosophy. It needs to be easy to understand by everyone involved in your service and clearly displayed.
The 2023 refresh of the plan includes:
The 30 year vision and the education objectives form the core of our overall approach to education:
The ATIS is calculated annually in arrears. Payment is made each year with the July ECE Funding Subsidy payment.
The ATIS is intended as a top-up for the specified service only. Isolated services that are grouped under one service provider may choose to combine several ATIS payments if this better ensures their sustainability.
The ATIS is paid annually in arrears with the July funding payment.
The ATIS is separate from the Isolation component of Equity Funding.
The Access Barrier Allowance is $4,000 per year.
The Access Barrier Allowance is for students who live too far from their nearest state or state-integrated school or
The Action Plan was launched in July 2020 and set out the Government actions we had committed to in 2020. We committed to regularly monitor and report on the progress of the Action Plan and to regularly update the Government actions in the Action Plan to make sure that we capture all the work Government is doing.
The Annual Top-Up for Isolated Services (ATIS) assists small licensed services in isolated areas to maintain access to ECE.
The Annual top-up for Isolated Services (ATIS) is an income top-up for small licensed ECE services in isolated areas.
The Associate Minister of Education has announced an action plan for attendance. The plan is an evolving set of initiatives that work together and support existing efforts to lift school attendance.
The B4 School Check is the last Well Child
The Bill also creates a new power for regulations to be made about Attendance Management Plans. This allows regulations to make detailed requirements for Attendance Management Plans. The regulations will be able to:
The Bill amends section 127 of the Act on school board objectives with a new section that makes educational achievement the paramount (highest priority) objective.
The Bill changes the wording of section 523 of the Act from:
The Bill changes the wording of section 617 of the Act from:
The Bill removes section 5 from the Act, which:
The Bill strengthens Initial Teacher Education (ITE) through greater government oversight of the Teaching Council. The Teaching Council is the regulatory body who sets standards for ITE and approves ITE programmes.
The Children's Act 2014 specifies who needs to be safety checked. You can read this in Section 23 of the Children's Act 2014.
The Children's Act 2014 specifies who needs to be safety checked. You can read this in section 23 of the Children's Act 2014.
The Code Compliance Certificate may include an occupancy load. This is the number of people who can be in the building at any one time and includes adults and children.
The Code of Health and Disability Services Consumers' Rights
The Daily Bus Conveyance allowance is a contribution to help with the cost of getting your eligible child to school or the nearest bus route. We pay it to you quarterly after your school sends us the enrolment report at the end of term. The conveyance allowance is not paid on fixed dates so the date you receive your payment will vary.
The EC15 Form is available from your Ministry regional office, or from the Resourcing Division Contact Centre on
The EC20 Form (Section removed and replaced with 7-9 in April 2015): 4-6
The EC20 Transitional advance form: 7-9
The ECE Census (also known as the ECE Return).
The ECE Census collects information about the operations of an early childhood service during a particular week. This information contributes to a comprehensive information base on early childhood education (ECE) in New Zealand and is used by the Ministry to monitor and forecast ECE expenditure and design new policies.
The ECE Funding Handbook explains how to keep proper records of staff qualifications.
The ECE Funding Handbook has more information about record keeping requirements.
The ECE Funding Handbook has the funding rates for each of these salary scales.
The ECE Funding Handbook sets out how we fund licensed early learning services.
The ECE Funding Subsidy (and the Plus 10 ECE) rates are the same. These rates are intended to subsidise the cost of providing ECE and to share the costs between government and parents.
The ECE Funding Subsidy is GST inclusive.
The ECE Funding Subsidy is the primary form of government funding for licensed ECE services.
The ECE Funding Subsidy is the primary form of government funding for licensed early childhood education (ECE) services.
The ECE Funding Subsidy must only be claimed for children less than 6 years of age who are not enrolled in school.
The ECE Funding Subsidy rates are determined by service type because the costs and requirements faced by different service types vary.
The ECE activity room needs to be designed and laid out so the physical environment supports the way the curriculum can be provided. Activity spaces need to be configured to allow for a range of learning experiences, as well as meeting the minimum space per child requirement.
The EEL is collected using:
The EEL is used to fund the administration of the international aspects of the:
The EEL rate for UIPs is 0.89% of the tuition received from international students, per trimester.
The ENROL guide has information for schools about managing the enrolments of both inbound and outbound students.
The ERC will inspect the damage and arrange any urgent work to be done in order to make the site safe and get the school functioning as quickly as possible. The following information lists the contacts for the ERC in your area.
The Early Childhood Education (ECE) Food Programme provides daily food for children aged 2 to 5 at eligible early learning services.
The Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008 (regulation 44 (1) (d)) require a 'person responsible' to supervise children, or the staff by whom the children are supervised, at all times.
The Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008 (schedule 2) set out how many children can attend with certain numbers of adults (adult to child ratio).
The Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008 also require there to be at least 1 staff member for every 25 children at the centre (at all times children are attending) who either holds a current first aid certificate, is a registered medical practitioner, is a nurse with a current practising certificate, or is a qualified ambulance officer or paramedic.
The Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations set out the conditions and duration of provisional licences:
The Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations set out the reasons we can suspend a licence.
The Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations set out when we can cancel a licence.
The Education (Physical Restraint) rules set out the specific actions schools need to take to reduce student distress and minimise physical restraint. These include developing policies and procedures, staff training, and compulsory reporting.
The Education (Registration of Early Childhood Services Teachers) Regulations 2004 require, in teacher-led services, the person acting as 'person responsible' to be a registered teacher.
The Education (School Staffing) Order in Council sets entitlements for staffing state schools and kura each year.
The Education Counts website provides useful research, data and statistics, including:
The Education Review Office (ERO) regularly reports on the quality of licensed early learning services. You can read the reports to help you choose.
The Education Review Office (ERO) reviews and reports publicly on the quality of education in all New Zealand schools and early childhood education services.
The Education Review Office is developing a Pacific Bilingual and Immersion Education Quality Framework to provide clear and consistent guidance on best practice pedagogy to early learning services and schools. This will become the basis for its review of relevant services and schools.
The Education Review Office produced a report on service philosophy statements that may be of use when developing a philosophy statement.
The Education and Training Act 2020
The Education and Training Act 2020 and the Teaching Council Rules 2016 outline the criteria for reporting serious misconduct and may assist in defining serious misconduct in your service.
The Education and Training Act 2020 applies to all early learning services in New Zealand.
The Education and Training Act 2020 enables the Minister of Education to issue a Statement of National Education and Learning Priorities (NELP).
The Education and Training Act 2020 outlines our responsibilities for home educated children and young people.
The Education and Training Act 2020 states that an employer must provide a mandatory report to the Teaching Council of
The Employment New Zealand website carries a range of resources and tools for employers covering disciplinary processes and dismissal.
The Equity Index is reviewed each year. Sometimes this means schools and
The Example annual plan is a starting point for how services can arrange key tasks in an annual plan.
The Export Education Levy
The Export Education Levy for schools
The Export Education Levy for tertiary providers
The External Reporting Board (XRB) has responsibility for setting these standards. Information on the audit and assurance standards can be found here.
The Fair Pay Agreement legislation means minimum pay standards can be negotiated and agreed for a whole sector or industry. NZEI Te Rui Roa will be using it to legally embed pay parity and better working conditions for ECE
The Family Violence Act covers us and:
The Family services directory has information on family support organisations in New Zealand.
The Frequent Absence Rule (examples): 6-8
The Frequent Absence Rule - 6-7
The Frequent Absence Rule - examples - 6-8
The Frequent Absence Rule ensures that enrolment agreements match attendance patterns as closely as possible, so that funding can be delivered fairly and accurately.
The Frequent Absence Rule helps services identify absence patterns that suggest a change in enrolment may be needed. By keeping enrolment agreements up-to-date, services can ensure that their funding is calculated accurately.
The Frequent Absence Rule must be applied in these 3 situations:
The Frequent Absence Rule must be continued from the next full month of operation after the period of non-operation.
The Frequent Absence Rule: 6-7
The Funding Rate Table shows the funding rates for each type of service. A copy of the table is included with this Handbook (Appendix 1).
The Funding Rate Table will be updated with any change in funding rates.
The Government has introduced a Bill to amend the Education and Training Act 2020 (the Act) and related secondary legislation to make several changes in schools and tertiary education.
The Government is also backing New Zealand's teaching workforce by funding teacher registrations and practising certificates, acknowledging the vital role educators play in driving positive change in classrooms.
The Government is developing a work programme to strengthen learning support so that the education system meets the needs of all learners and their families.
The Government subsidises all
The Health and Safety at Work Act 2015 (HSWA) requires you to notify WorkSafe of fatalities, serious injuries and illnesses that happen to workers and others as a result of work. WorkSafe has detailed information about making a notification. For early learning services, 'others' includes children, parents and visitors.
The Holidays Act 2003 was set up to promote work-life balance for employees. It sets out how employers should pay staff for annual holidays, public holidays, sick leave and bereavement leave.
The Human Rights Commission website provides information about equal opportunities, Including a discrimination and complaints guide.
The ICT contractors panel is a list of ICT contractors approved by us to work on the following school projects:
The Incredible Years Autism
The Incredible Years Autism programmes are part of a range of supports that the Ministry provides for children and young people on the autism spectrum.
The International Student Fee (also known as the International Student Levy) is charged to state and state-integrated schools with enrolled international fee-paying students. The fee is intended to reimburse the Crown for costs associated to fee-paying international students in schools. It is deducted from the school's quarterly operational grants on a per-student basis.
The Kindergarten Teachers, Head Teachers and Senior Teachers' Collective Agreement (KTCA) is an agreement negotiated by members of the New Zealand Education Institute (NZEI)
The Kiwi Park cash flow model has a number of pre-set formulas to adjust for financial transactions that have not passed through the school's bank accounts.
The Learning Support system is being redesigned so it is needs based, equitable, efficient and consistent in its provision.
The Maths PLD supports your use of the maths resources by focusing on implementing the learning area and developing programmes in your schools.
The Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) complies with the Education and Training Act, Privacy Act and Official Information Act.
The Mental Health Foundation has a list of helplines if you need to talk to someone now.
The Minister of Education has granted schools permission to close for 4 additional half-days in 2025 for curriculum focused professional learning and development (PLD). These days do not need to be made up.
The Minister of Education has outlined 6 priorities to improve the education system.
The Minister of Education has specified the circumstances boards can close their schools during Term time.
The Ministers of Education receive a wide range of advice from us when they make decisions across the education sector.
The Ministry also has planning guidance and a quick checklist for your overall emergency management plan.
The Ministry and WorkSafe have produced a flowchart to show what you need to do when there is a notifiable event at your service.
The Ministry and schools must engage property project or programme managers from the property project and management (PPPM) panel.
The Ministry calculates that the percentage of Certificated Teacher Hours for June - September for Kowhai Street Childcare Centre was 67%.
The Ministry can approve funding on a notional roll in recognition of the special function of the service.
The Ministry can provide information to help groups set up early childhood education (ECE) services.
The Ministry does not accept any liability for the accuracy or content of information on this website belonging to third parties, nor for the accuracy or content of any third-party website that you may access via a hyperlink from this site.
The Ministry does not fund public holidays in advance.
The Ministry does not provide guidance for the
The Ministry for Primary Industries
The Ministry for Regulation published its final report.
The Ministry has identified four areas for spending:
The Ministry has prepared flow charts which explain the checks that must be completed on adults in specific roles.
The Ministry is seeking to learn from schools about what works best so the STAR and supporting resources continue to be improved.
The Ministry is wanting to work over the next year with education services to develop a tool and associated supports. Currently, there is extensive information broadly on language planning on
The Ministry makes an advance payment to the new service on the next available payment date.
The Ministry makes an advance payment to the service on the next available major payment date.
The Ministry may choose to 'follow', 'like' or otherwise establish connections with others on social media.
The Ministry may offset against all or any funding or other sums of money payable by the Ministry to the service provider, any debt or other sum payable to the Ministry by that Service Provider.
The Ministry may, subject to any conditions and for any period, determine that no funding is payable either in full or in part for any service(s) where:
The Ministry multiplies the average number of each FCHs per day by the number of days the service expects to be open over the coming 4 months.
The Ministry must be informed of changes to a service (or service provider) bank account using this form.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment provides comprehensive advice for employers through its Employment New Zealand website. This gives you access to such tools such as an employment agreement builder and a holiday and leave calculator, and resources including:
The Ministry of Education also has a range of pamphlets available for parents.
The Ministry of Education and partner agencies will use a range of levers across early learning, schooling and tertiary education to support the growth of Pacific Languages in Education. Some of these levers have already been established, while some are still under development. We will work with Pacific communities to support their leadership of Pacific Languages in Education.
The Ministry of Education can't give you this permission.
The Ministry of Education collects and stores a range of information through the ELI system and via paper-based forms. This includes information on enrolled children, teaching and non-teaching staff, as well as some general information on licensed early childhood services.
The Ministry of Education collects information annually from all playgroups about hours of operation, and age, ethnicity and gender of children attending. This annual statistics form (RS61PG) is sent out to playgroups in June each year. Accurate enrolment and attendance records will make it easier to complete this form.
The Ministry of Education has developed an enrolment scheme for Te Kura Rau Iti to define its school zone. We encourage you to review the details of this proposed zone and provide your feedback.
The Ministry of Education is developing a work programme to deliver on this priority. Key features of this work programme include:
The Ministry of Education logo may not be used on your site without the Ministry's permission.
The Ministry of Education must also be notified of such incidents.
The Ministry of Education must also be notified of such incidents. See HS33 Incident notification to the Ministry of Education.
The Ministry of Education office nearest to your service.
The Ministry of Education recognises the Trust Board as the guardians of
The Ministry of Education resource Learning Environments for Playgroups has information on planning appropriate play activities to support the learning of the children in your group.
The Ministry of Education values your input and encourages you to review the proposed enrolment scheme for Te Kura Rau Iti and the proposed amendments to the neighbouring school zones. Your feedback will be carefully considered before a final decision is made on the enrolment schemes.
The Ministry of Education will measure progress and reporting to Pacific communities on a two-yearly basis through the Action Plan Progress Reports and the reporting on the Pacific Languages Strategy.
The Ministry of Education will regularly review the main costs of ECE provision to advise the Government about the changes in costs faced by ECE services.
The Ministry of Education would consider services to be in breach of this criteria if for example:
The Ministry of Education, alongside
The Ministry of Health does not recommend any particular cleaning product, as this depends on the purpose and use. However, hydrogen peroxide and bleach are both effective sanitisers and may be used for some purposes. Some cleaning and sanitising products are more or less effective on some bacteria/viruses/soils and so on. The product being used must be effective and used in line with manufacturer guidance. Contact your local office of the public health service for site-specific advice.
The Ministry of Health does not recommend any particular cleaning product, as this depends on the purpose and use. However, hydrogen peroxide and bleach are both effective sanitisers and may be used for some purposes. Some cleaning and sanitising products are more or less effective on some bacteria/viruses/soils and so on. The product being used must be effective and used in line with manufacturer guidance. Contact your regional office of the public health service for site-specific advice.
The Ministry of Health has produced a publication on infant formula.
The Ministry of Health have a number of publications on drinking water.
The Ministry of Health provide guidance which classifies foods based on their nutritional value with colour codes in the healthy food and drink guidance. The Ministry of Health have determined that healthy options (Green) should make up at least 75% of foods and drinks served at early learning services. For children under 2 years of age, all food and drink provided should be green.
The Ministry of Social Development, Work and Income provides a range of support for childcare costs, which include the Childcare Subsidy and Guaranteed Childcare Assistance Payment.
The Ministry places the service on a rate depending on its operating structure and percentage of Certificated Teacher Hours and its salary attestation for certificated teachers.
The Ministry regional office will approve/not approve funded emergency closure and confirm this to the service by letter.
The Ministry regional office will approve/not approve funded emergency closure and confirm to the service by letter.
The Ministry retains the right to reduce any advance funding calculated from an EC20 where it deems the claimed numbers on the EC20 to be over-claimed.
The Ministry retains the right to reduce any advance funding due to be paid to you where it deems the claimed numbers on the RS3 to be over-estimated.
The Ministry retains the right to request proof and evidence to support the numbers claimed on the RS3 form.
The Ministry will accept up to 80 discretionary hours per funding period (to maintain current rates of funding) when certificated relievers are not available, provided that the record keeping requirements described in this section are met.
The Ministry will calculate the proportion of Certificated Teacher Hours and determine the funding rate for your service.
The Ministry will fund the enrolled hours of permanently enrolled children who are absent up to certain limits. The limits are defined by 2 absence rules the Three-Week Rule for Continuous Absence (Section 6-5) and the Frequent Absence Rule (Sections 6-7 and 6-8) to be read along with Chapter 6-3.
The Ministry will not fund closures caused by these circumstances.
The Ministry will not prosecute parents of students who are absent because of chronic illness or health conditions associated with a disability, or who are genuinely engaging with a school and the supports offered.
The Ministry will not split payments between parties.
The Ministry will notify eligible early learning services of their Targeted Funding entitlement in February each year.
The Ministry will recover funding claimed for absences where there is no signed enrolment agreement for the child (see Section 6-1 for further details on enrolment records).
The Ministry wishes to maintain a reasonable level of funding for children who will return to the service. A level of security in funding allows services to budget more effectively.
The Multiple Barriers Allowances are:
The Multiple Barriers Boarding Allowance is for students who are experiencing significant difficulties in their education, across multiple areas.
The NELP licensing criteria came into effect on 1 January 2022.
The NELP remains in effect for a period of five years unless it is earlier withdrawn or replaced by notice in the New Zealand Gazette.
The NELP sets out 7 priorities for the early learning and schooling sectors. These priorities are joint with the TES. It also shows what Government is doing and sets out actions early learning services and schools and
The NELP shares priorities with the Tertiary Education Strategy (TES), which set the strategic direction and current and medium priorities for tertiary education in 2020. It recognises that learners change and grow as they move through the education system and the education system needed to listen to them, adapt to their needs, and empower them to achieve their aspirations, whatever their age or stage of learning.
The NZ Heart Foundation has information on their free Healthy Heart Award programme which provides structure and guidance around all aspects of food and nutrition. This includes multilingual lunchbox resources, policies, sample menus and resources to engage
The NZQA website lists training providers who can assess the first aid unit standards we require you to have.
The National Certificate of Educational Achievement (NCEA) is the national senior secondary school qualification.
The National Emergency Management Agency and the Ministry of Education have produced a template that can be used for planning for a variety of emergencies (see HS5 Safe assembly areas, above).
The National Emergency Management Agency and the Ministry of Education have produced a template that can be used for planning for a variety of emergencies.
The New Zealand Government has some specific responsibilities and commitments to Pacific languages. The first
The New Zealand Police vetting service can check staff or volunteers who have lived in Australia.
The New Zealand Police website describes what a Police vet is and sets out the process.
The New Zealand Police website sets out the process for applying for a Police vet.
The New Zealand Qualifications Authority (NZQA) ensures that New Zealand qualifications are regarded as credible and robust, nationally and internationally.
The New Zealand Qualifications Authority (NZQA) has information about statutory actions for unsubmitted data and payments.
The New Zealand Qualifications Authority (NZQA) website has more information about sitting NCEA at a link school.
The New Zealand Qualifications Authority must assess any overseas qualifications as comparable to a NZ ECE or primary teaching qualification, before it can be recognised for funding purposes. The teacher must also be registered and certificated with the Teaching Council.
The New Zealand Standard for playground equipment and surfacing is NZS 5828:2015 Playground equipment and surfacing.
The Office of the Auditor-General has detailed examples of how conflicts of interest happen and provides tips on how to manage them.
The Office of the Privacy Commissioner has guidance about sharing information about vulnerable children.
The Office of the Privacy Commissioner outlines your responsibilities under the Act.
The Office of the Privacy Commissioner website
The Official Information Act 1982 (OIA) lets eligible people request information from Ministers or departments, including the Ministry of Education.
The Official Information Act 1982 (or OIA) enables any eligible person to request official information. We are committed to complying with the purposes, principle and requirements of the OIA.
The Official Information Act and media responses
The Ombudsman can be contacted through their website.
The PITA is available to Pacific immersion and bilingual services who have identified as one of the 2 Pacific immersion and bilingual education and care service types. These service types are:
The Persons responsible (Co-ordinator / visiting teacher) and educator must agree in advance there is a sound pedagogical reason for observing a child outside the home.
The Persons responsible (Co-ordinator / visiting teacher) must be able to provide evidence of both having visited children at the home-based services under their supervision, and that the visits were planned.
The Persons responsible (Co-ordinator / visiting teacher) must take all reasonable steps to observe each child once every month.
The Persons responsible (Co-ordinator / visiting teacher) should keep detailed notes of their observations of the child. Any regulatory issues they note during the visit must also be recorded.
The Playcentre Diploma in Early Childhood and Adult Education, and
The Playcentre Diploma in Early Childhood and Adult Education.
The Playcentre person responsible is not required to hold a current teacher practising certificate.
The Playgroup Funding Handbook explains how playgroup funding is calculated and what conditions need to be met to receive funding.
The Playgroup funding handbook applies to all playgroups funded by the Ministry of Education. In particular, it is intended for the management committees of these playgroups.
The Playgroup funding handbook provides further clarification of the changes associated with the introduction of the Education (Playgroups) Regulations 2008 which came into force on 1 December 2008.
The Playgroup funding handbook provides information about how playgroup funding is calculated and the conditions which need to be met to receive funding in accordance with section 548 of the Education and Training Act 2020.
The Playgroup funding handbook sets out the conditions on which funding payments are made to playgroups.
The Police and WorkSafe will investigate notifiable events.
The Police vet will include any information that the Police think is relevant to the role the person will hold at school.
The Police vet will include any information that the Police think is relevant to the role the person will hold at your service.
The Privacy Act 2020 governs how organisations and businesses can collect, store, use and share personal information. This includes early learning services.
The Public Service Commissioner outlines expectations for reporting and managing conflicts of interest.
The Qualification Group notation used in the minimum salary scales denotes the:
The RS2 change of bank account form.
The RS3 Initial Application for Funding for an Early Childhood Service (RS3 Form) is the key funding form for new services.
The RS3 initial application for funding for an early childhood service.
The RS7 Early Childhood Funding Return (the RS7 return) is the main funding return for early childhood education (ECE) services.
The RS7 Return consists of several different sections.
The RS7 Return is completed three times a year:
The RS7 Return tells the Ministry the number of funded child hours (FCHs) that are funded for each service, and the rate at which each FCH will be funded.
The RS7 early childhood funding return.
The RS7 return will contain only those sections relevant to you.
The Regulations including:
The Resource Management Act 1991 is concerned with keeping the environment a pleasant place to live, work, and play. When considering resource consent applications, territorial local authorities (councils) are required to consider any adverse impact the activity may have on the surrounding environment.
The Resourcing Auditor will contact your service before the visit takes place, advising the time of the visit and the documentation you will need to have available.
The Review was designed to make a tangible difference for parents by ensuring that the regulatory framework enables ECE to be supportive, nurturing, and a beneficial experience for both children and their parents.
The Royal Commission into Historical Abuse in State Care and in the Care of Faith-based Institutions has released its final landmark report '
The SAAR will be provided in both PDF and Excel formats. Provide both to your auditor and service provider.
The STAR has been developed in line with the good practice identified in Education Review Office (ERO) evaluations and school indicators.
The STAR helps us all to understand what should happen when students do not attend school.
The STAR will continue to be improved as we learn from schools about what works best.
The Safer organisations, Safer children publication provides advice on good practice to help organisations draft high quality child protection policies and review their procedures.
The School Onsite Training Programme has been expanded to 242 places for 2025 (up from 150 for 2024) with further increases for 2026.
The School Property Strategy 2030
The School Property Strategy 2030 overview
The Sir Apirana Ngata Memorial Scholarship
The Specialised School Transport Assistance (SESTA) service helps children and young people with safety or mobility needs get to and from school. If your child qualifies for SESTA, we provide a place in a vehicle or a payment to contribute to their travel costs.
The Staff Hour Count must be completed by all kindergartens that operate all-day.
The Staff Hour Count must be completed for all days the service operates as teacher-led.
The Staff Record must be signed (in full) at the end of each week by each regulated (ratio) staff member as a true and correct record of their actual hours worked for that week.
The Standards for the Teaching Profession determined by the Teaching Council of
The Statement of Cash Flow is important because it informs the reader of the school's cash position.
The Statement of Cash Flows worksheet is linked to the Actual C F Model C Y and the Budget C F Model C Y worksheets please ensure that you have checked both of the cash flow worksheet totals on line 263 which should be showing a nil balance from Column D to column T. If some columns are not, you will need to investigate and fix errors.
The Statement of National Education and Learning Priorities (NELP) was published in November 2020.
The Stepped Attendance Response (STAR) sets expectations for school, student, parent/guardian, Ministry of Education and broader system responses to student absence.
The TSP must create an incident report in
The TSP must follow their own emergency procedures. They must also immediately contact:
The Tagaloa scholarships are for Pacific students in their final year of postgraduate tertiary study.
The Targeted Funding guidelines provide exemplars for how early learning services can use Targeted Funding.
The Teaching Council champions best practise and leadership, and:
The Teaching Council has guidance about police clearances for workers who come from other countries.
The Teaching Council has information about what information can be shared when reporting a concern.
The Teaching Council has more information about what to do if you are worried about a teacher's conduct.
The Teaching Council has more information about who can apply for an endorsement and how.
The Teaching Council of Aotearoa New Zealand
The Teaching Council of Aotearoa New Zealand (Teaching Council) is responsible for Police vetting registered teachers and relief teachers. This is part of the process to hold a practicing certificate or Limited Authority to Teach (LAT).
The Teaching Council of Aotearoa New Zealand provides information about the process of teacher registration.
The Teaching Council of Aotearoa New Zealand sets out the process for Police vetting teachers from other countries.
The Tertiary Education Commission (TEC) is responsible for government-funded post-compulsory education and training offered in New Zealand.
The Tertiary Education Commission is responsible for the SDR process. Their website has information about how to complete and submit SDRs.
The Three Week Rule for Continuous Absence (Three Week Rule) limits the period of time that the Ministry will fund continuous absences, to 3 weeks.
The Three Week Rule will restart from the first date the child is enrolled to attend after the centre re-opens.
The Three Week Rule: extension for extended non-operation allows services to suspend the Three Week Rule for Continuous Absence (Three Week Rule) during an extended period of non-operation.
The Transitional Advance form (EC20) is used to calculate, or recalculate, advance funding for services in a number of situations such as:
The University of Canterbury and Massey University have information on their website about entry requirements for homeschool students.
The Vision for Pacific Education is that diverse Pacific learners and their families are safe, valued, and equipped to achieve their education aspirations.
The Work and Income childcare subsidy can be used instead of 20 hours ECE. If your childcare subsidy is for more than 20 hours a week, you can receive a mix of both the childcare subsidy and 20 hours ECE.
The World Health Organization (1999) has recommended maximum noise exposures in early childhood education and care centre environments.
The World Health Organization (1999) has recommended maximum noise exposures in early childhood education and care centre environments:
The X code is actually not, um, marked as a type of absence.
The ability for fingers or limbs to become trapped
The ability for fingers or limbs to become trapped.
The absence rules in Chapter 6 apply to 20 Hours ECE funding.
The action plan has resources and guidance for early learning services, schools, tertiary providers and families and communities, including planning templates.
The activity room is set up so that children can independently access equipment and resources.
The additional funding increases the total investment in schools and early childhood education by 3.6% in the coming year to $19.1 billion. The total includes $429 million of savings found within Vote Education that have been redirected to higher priority frontline areas within education.
The adult-to-child ratio must be kept at all times. This includes when you take children on an excursion or when adults stop working for lunch or other entitled breaks. To cover breaks, you may wish to employ additional staff, or bring in staff from non-contact time.
The adult:child ratio with which the service provider is required to comply under regulation 44(1)(b) or any direction by the Secretary under regulation 54(2).
The adults might then balance this information from the child with what they see on session. It is very important that adults are interacting with children, noticing what activities the children are interested in and participating in their learning. The adults on session can then discuss how to extend play at the next session.
The advance payment is washed-up against actual funded child hours on the next RS7 Return and 20 Hours ECE funding becomes part of the normal funding cycle
The age of each child enrolled in a service is important in determining at which funding rate each funded child hour (FCH) will be paid. The number of hours for which each child is enrolled is important in determining the number of hours for which funding can be claimed.
The agencies include the Ministry of Education,
The allowance is irrespective of the language competency of individual certificated
The allowance is irrespective of the language competency of individual certificated teacher or the children attending the service.
The allowance is only for
The allowance is paid in 2 instalments a year, usually around June and November. When your application for home education is approved, you get the first payment in whatever of these months comes first.
The allowance is paid quarterly to your child's school. It cannot be paid in advance.
The allowance will be paid at higher rates as the certificated
The allowance will be paid at higher rates as the certificated teacher increases their years of service as outlined in the table above.
The allowance will be paid for your child until the end of the year in which they turn 19.
The amended section also:
The amount of advance funding paid is based on the average funded child-hours (FCHs) for the previous fourth months, the number of days the service will be operating in the forthcoming 4 months, and the funding rate at which each FCH will be paid.
The annual budget should be developed at the same time as the annual plan.
The annual charge for Cyclical Maintenance Provision is accumulated in the provision for Cyclical Maintenance.
The annual plan describes and guides what the service will do in its operation in the next 12 months. It is detailed enough to cover day-to-day events, for example, excursions, staff appraisals or professional development, but is also a schedule of planned strategic opportunities, including for self-review and internal evaluation (GMA5). An annual plan aligns with other aspects of governance, management and administration (GMA) and therefore should be developed at the same time as the annual budget.
The annual plan describes and guides what the service will do in its operation in the next 12 months. It is detailed enough to cover day-to-day events, for example, excursions, staff appraisals or professional development, but is also a schedule of planned strategic opportunities, including for self-review and internal evaluation (GMA6). An annual plan aligns with other aspects of governance, management and administration (GMA) and therefore should be developed at the same time as the annual budget.
The annual plan should be created in consultation with the person responsible so that the teaching and learning needs of children can be met. The aspirations of
The appliances needed for cooking and/or heating food will depend upon the number of children you are cooking for, and the type of meals being prepared. Options include microwaves, stove tops and ovens.
The application form has more information about these requirements.
The area situated around each cot is well ventilated to allow sufficient fresh air to circulate and there is no build-up of carbon dioxide, moisture and heat (HS10)
The arrangement of furniture and equipment in the activity room needs to be designed and laid out so effective supervision is easy.
The assessor will consider the information you share with them, as well as any other relevant material we have find, such as documentation from the school. The assessor will review all of this information to consider the merits of your claim.
The attendance code comparison tree shows which codes changed.
The attendance code guidelines, their purpose is
The attendance codes have been to,
The attendance of a permanently enrolled child does not depend on the absence of any other enrolled child.
The attendance service works with students who are enrolled in school but have not been attending. Schools can contact the service for help with managing attendance and reducing unjustified absence.
The audit report must be signed and dated by the auditor.
The audit visit and report
The authority that originally issued the document.
The availability of a make-up day is at the discretion of the service.
The balance in the checks should be 0. Again, if there are balances then you will need to start checking each line item and locate the error at its source. Please do not force a balance by changing the formula.
The balance in the checks should be 0. If there are balances, then you will need to start checking each line item and locate the error at its source. Please do not force a balance by changing the formula.
The balance in the checks should be zero. If there are balances then you will need to start checking each line item and locate the error at its source. Please do not force a balance by changing the formula.
The bank account number must be verified by:
The basic component reflects standard operating costs for all ECE services, for example:
The below documents provide guidance for
The benefits of using a 2-stage process are that:
The best job descriptions do not limit employees but enable them to use their experience, grow their skills and develop their ability to contribute within their organisation.
The blank worksheet can now be completed by entering in the balances for each code. Complete the data input section by section so that you can check totals as you enter data for each category.
The board approved offsite learning,
The board approves the final financial statements.
The board is responsible for completing a school access plan with contractors. This will help clarify who needs a Police vet.
The board must follow our guidelines when doing a risk assessment and show this in your decision-making. This is required under Schedule 4 of the Education and Training Act 2020.
The board of each school or
The board returns all documents to the auditor.
The body, agency or person who or that operates the early childhood education and care centre.
The body, agency, or person who or that operates the home-based education and care service.
The body, agency, or person who or that operates the hospital-based education and care service.
The boundaries of these zones are set at the halfway point between neighbouring schools of the same type, for example, between two secondary schools.
The building consent process is administered by the local councils, as are council by-laws that might impact on the centre. The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment has information regarding Early childhood education centres and Building Code compliance.
The building where your playgroup meets may already have an evacuation procedure. Buildings like churches or community halls, and libraries are generally required to have an approved evacuation scheme under fire legislation. Talk to the building owners about this so that your playgroup can be part of any evacuation drills or planning. You will need to regularly practice emergency evacuations/drills so that every adult and child knows what they can expect and need to do in an emergency.
The bus controller will contact principals at any affected schools.
The bus will take your child to school but does not provide a door-to-door service. You will need to get your child to and from their closest bus stop.
The car park entrance is at 12-18 Normanby Road. Push the entry button for the reception to open the gates. The accessible car park is located on level 1.
The cash flow model needs some more refinement to improve the presentation of information around the buying, selling and disposal of assets.
The cash flow statement measures how well the school manages its cash position, meaning how well the school generates cash to pay its debt obligations and fund its operating expenses.
The certification criteria were last updated in September 2022.
The closest school transport service to get to their nearest state, state-integrated school or
The closures for 2 half days must be for the purpose of staff participating in curriculum- and assessment-related activities, and these closures may occur anytime during 2025.
The completed plan must be endorsed by the procurement leader. The evaluation team should be told of any declared conflict.
The compulsory online module is available for anyone to access. It covers legislative questions and the difference between appropriate physical contact and restraint.
The consultation feedback shaped the content of this resource.
The consultation presents an important opportunity for a range of voices to be heard on this critical learning for our young people. We strongly encourage you to have your say.
The contents of our social media accounts are intended for informational purposes only. The Ministry of Education shall in no event accept any liability for loss or damage suffered by any person or body due to information provided on these sites or linked sites.
The contracts are for an initial term of 6 years with 2 3-year rights of renewal.
The cost of early learning services depends on what type you choose and how many hours your child will attend.
The cots must be secured to the wall so that the cots cannot fall in any event (HS6)
The course is for new and existing bus controllers who have not already done the training. It takes about 40 minutes.
The criteria ensures that children receive consistent, sound and positive guidance about ways of behaving at playgroup.
The criteria in this section are grouped together by topic. Each criterion has also been given a short, descriptive title.
The criteria in this section have been grouped together by topic. Each criterion has also been given a short, descriptive title.
The criterion aims to address a current 'gap' in the Regulations which requires services to have heaters, but not that they are used when children are attending. The criterion aims to uphold the wellbeing of children. Note that the wellbeing of adults at the service is covered by the Health and Safety at Work Act.
The criterion aims to ensure hygienic food practices are maintained for the safety of children.
The criterion aims to ensure that adequate toilet provision is made for adults attending the service, thus upholding the wellbeing of children by reducing the possibility of inappropriate adult use of the children's facilities.
The criterion aims to ensure that animals kept by the service do not pose a health risk to children. Wording of current regulation appears to be focused on maintaining animal health. This issue is:
The criterion aims to ensure that inadequate laundering practices do not pose a health risk to children.
The criterion aims to ensure that parents are aware of key regulatory information relating to the service's operation (thus providing an additional level of accountability for the service), and are given the information they need if they wish to raise concerns and be involved in the service.
The criterion aims to ensure that services have the means to contact parents as necessary, and vice versa, as well as easily deal with any emergency situations that may arise.
The criterion aims to ensure that sleeping provisions are arranged so that they do not present a hazard to children's safety and wellbeing.
The criterion aims to ensure that the service has information available for parents and staff about the philosophy that underpins their provision of early childhood education and care. This information supports the collaboration between parents and the service to achieve positive outcomes for children.
The criterion aims to minimise the risk of choking on food and to ensure in an event of an adverse reaction appropriate action is taken.
The criterion aims to prevent cross-infection by ensuring that mattresses that may be used by many children over time can be kept hygienically clean.
The criterion aims to prevent cross-infection by ensuring that sleep provisions used periodically (that is, not permanently set up) are hygienically stored when not in use.
The criterion aims to uphold a minimum level of quality education as well as safety for children.
The criterion aims to uphold a minimum level of quality education by ensuring that children have access to a range of suitable and safe equipment and materials.
The criterion aims to uphold children's safety and wellbeing by giving Ministry of Education the ability to suspend or cancel a licence if the premises are not compliant with the Building Act or maintained in good condition (as opposed to a fine being imposed by the local authority under the Building Act which may not address the immediate risk to children attending).
The criterion aims to uphold children's safety by ensuring that there are facilities to support the hygienic preparation and storage of food.
The criterion aims to uphold children's wellbeing by ensuring that some consideration is given to the need for privacy by some children, due to cultural or individual differences. The criterion also aims to prevent service providers from designing toilet areas purely from a cost-driven perspective.
The criterion aims to uphold hygienic practices by ensuring that handwashing facilities are adequate.
The criterion aims to uphold hygienic practices by ensuring that the design/location of toilet/handwashing facilities encourages their use by children. The criterion is underpinned by the belief that independence in children is valued.
The criterion aims to uphold the health and safety of children by ensuring hygienic practices occur in regard to food.
The criterion aims to uphold the health and safety of children by ensuring that children are given proper care, and that medication is not administered inappropriately by services.
The criterion aims to uphold the health and safety of children by ensuring that children are not unduly exposed to specified infectious diseases while at the service. Diseases included in Appendix 2 are those listed in the current Health (Infectious and Notifiable Diseases) Regulations 2016 that commonly occur.
The criterion aims to uphold the health and safety of children by ensuring that children who fall ill or are injured are given proper care.
The criterion aims to uphold the health and safety of children by ensuring that medication is given to children only by people with the necessary knowledge and skills.
The criterion aims to uphold the health and safety of children by ensuring they have access to a clean drinking water supply. Requirement for independent access is based on evidence that self-access to water enables children to maintain an adequate level of hydration.
The criterion aims to uphold the health and safety of children.
The criterion aims to uphold the health and wellbeing of children by ensuring that there are suitable facilities and practices for washing children who vomit or soil themselves while attending the service so that the risk of cross-infection is reduced.
The criterion aims to uphold the health, safety and wellbeing of children by ensuring the service meets their nutritional needs or alternatively encourages parents to do so. Requirement to keep records for 12 months has been reduced to 3, as this is considered to be a more useful minimum period of time. Record-keeping requirements serve 2 purposes:
The criterion aims to uphold the health, safety, and wellbeing of children by ensuring that appropriate facilities are available for children wearing nappies. Nappy changing in an early childhood centre is a high-risk activity from a number of perspectives, for example hygiene (as there can be large numbers of children using the facilities) and safety (risk of falls for the child, risk of back injury for adults). Nappy changing is also a personal care routine that by definition makes the young child vulnerable.
The criterion aims to uphold the safety and wellbeing of children by ensuring that pornographic or violent material (electronic games, DVDs, websites, magazines and so on) is not available to children.
The criterion aims to uphold the safety and wellbeing of children by ensuring that pornographic or violent material (written, visual or electronic) is not available to children.
The criterion aims to uphold the safety and wellbeing of children by ensuring that sleeping provisions are safe and appropriate for children using them.
The criterion aims to uphold the safety and wellbeing of children by ensuring that there are comfortable and safe facilities for the isolation of a sick child.
The criterion aims to uphold the safety and wellbeing of children while they are sleeping and minimise risk of harm. Requiring a documented procedure allows for parental input. Display ensures that all adults at the service are made aware of the procedure. Record-keeping requirements serve 2 purposes:
The criterion aims to uphold the safety and wellbeing of children.
The criterion aims to uphold the safety of children by ensuring adults with the necessary skills and knowledge to deal with injuries and illness are present at all times and readily available.
The criterion aims to uphold the safety of children by ensuring that adults at the service have the necessary knowledge and supplies to deal with emergency situations.
The criterion aims to uphold the safety of children by ensuring that all equipment is of a standard that is considered safe.
The criterion aims to uphold the safety of children by ensuring that equipment is safely stored. The criterion also aims to ensure that the design of the storage area does not unduly limit the range of experiences on offer to children on a daily basis (particularly in relation to 'pack-away' services).
The criterion aims to uphold the safety of children by ensuring that services have a mechanism to assess and address environmental hazards in an ongoing way.
The criterion aims to uphold the safety of children by ensuring that the premises have an adequate plan for evacuating children in the event of a fire.
The criterion aims to uphold the safety of children by ensuring that:
The criterion aims to uphold the safety of children by reducing the risk of them coming into direct contact with broken glass.
The criterion aims to uphold the safety of children by removing the risk of hot water scalding. The criterion also aims to ensure that water is kept at a comfortable temperature to encourage hygienic handwashing practices.
The criterion aims to uphold the safety of children while travelling in motor vehicles. Linking the restraint of children to licensing requirements allows Ministry of Education to put a regulatory intervention in place for non-compliance, as opposed to fines given by Police.
The criterion aims to uphold the safety of children.
The criterion aims to uphold the safety of infants and toddlers as well as a minimum level of quality education by ensuring that mixed-age environments are designed to consider their unique needs.
The criterion aims to uphold the wellbeing of children by ensuring that they have clean and warm bedding when sleeping.
The criterion aims to uphold the wellbeing of children by ensuring there are adequate provisions for sleep to take account of the needs and sleep patterns of individual children.
The criterion aims to uphold the wellbeing of children by ensuring there are adequate provisions for sleep.
The criterion aims to uphold the wellbeing of children by ensuring there are adequate provisions for sleep. The criterion also aims to ensure that children who are not sleeping do not have their activities unduly limited.
The criterion clarifies current expectations of public health units in some areas, and is included in requirements to facilitate clarity and transparency for services with regards to what they have to provide. The criterion aims to ensure that facilities uphold hygienic practices.
The criterion could be met ensuring that after enrolment, copies of the statement of philosophy and important service policies are made available to parents. Each educator could have a folder with all relevant documents in it so that these can be easily accessed by parents.
The criterion ensures at least 1 toilet is provided for those present at the service. The reference to children aged 2:
The criterion is intended to ensure that children attending playgroups have access to a wide range of suitable and safe equipment and materials.
The criterion is underpinned by the belief that a level of collaboration between parents and adults providing education and care will result in positive outcomes for children. The criterion aims to ensure that parents are well informed about the service's operation and their child's education, and are made aware of the input they are able to have.
The criterion is underpinned by the belief that positive outcomes are achieved for children when adults working at the service have the space and opportunity to plan and reflect, and in the case of all-day services, have their breaks away from children if they wish. The criterion also aims to ensure that a level of privacy, confidentiality, dignity and respect is available when required for discussions with parents.
The criterion is underpinned by the belief that the opportunity for outdoor play is an important feature of the education and care of young children in New Zealand.
The criterion makes the development and maintenance of all the 'required documentation' related to the criteria a licensing requirement.
The criterion requires your service to make the NELP more visible in your practice and planning. The Ministry will assess how the NELP has been woven into your self-review and internal evaluation processes, systems, professional development and annual plans
The criterion requires your service to make the NELP more visible in your practice and planning. The Ministry will assess how the NELP has been woven into your self-review and internal evaluation processes, systems, professional development, and annual plans.
The criterion will provide the Ministry of Education with evidence of the service's ability to continue to meet regulatory standards and criteria and afford the financial costs of providing a quality licensed service.
The curriculum framework is based on
The curriculum should enable children with diverse strengths and needs to be actively engaged in learning with, and alongside, their peers in the service. Offering an inclusive environment involves adapting environments and removing any barriers to participation and learning. Teaching inclusively means that
The curriculum should recognise that all
The curriculum should support the cultural identity of all children, affirm and celebrate cultural differences, and aim to help children gain a positive awareness of their own and other cultures.
The curriculum should support the cultural identity of all children, affirm, and celebrate cultural differences, and aim to help children gain a positive awareness of their own and other cultures.
The curriculum standard requires the service provider for every certificated playgroup to:
The curriculum standard: general is the standard that requires every licensed service provider to whom this regulation applies to
The curriculum standard: general is the standard that requires every licensed service provider to whom this regulation applies to:
The curriculum will enable children with special health and/or educational needs to be actively engaged in learning with and alongside the other children in the service.
The data is collected and aggregated for the Ministry by Google Analytics, a measurement and research service. You can find out about Google Analytics' privacy policy in their Privacy Centre.
The data will also inform future policy development and decisions aimed at improving student attendance.
The data you record in your SMS can help you in your efforts to improve attendance. At the end of each term, you will receive from us a provisional Every Day Matters report. Your report will include:
The depreciation that was accumulated by the assets disposed of are added back as negative numbers in column S Rows 177 to 184.
The design and layout of any ECE activity room supports effective adult supervision.
The design and layout of any ECE activity room supports the provision of a range of different types of learning experiences that are appropriate to the number, ages, abilities, and specific mobility or treatment needs of the children likely to use it.
The design and layout of the nappy changing facilities need to be appropriate to the ages and number of children attending. The nappy changing area in a sessional service with only older children attending does not need to be the same as those in an all-day service with high numbers of infants/toddlers.
The design and layout of the premises support effective adult supervision so that children's access to indoor and outdoor spaces is not unnecessarily limited.
The design and layout of the premises support effective adult supervision so that children's access to the licensed space (indoor and outdoor) is not unnecessarily limited.
The design and layout of the premises supports the provision of a variety of activities and experiences with regard to the age and number of children attending.
The design and layout of the premises:
The design of the bus route takes into consideration:
The design, construction, and location of the facilities ensure that:
The designated space for sleeping children under 2 years, and any storage space for furniture and items not permanently set up, will be excluded from the measurement of the indoor activity area (as per Schedule 4 in the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008).
The development of the child (mobile or non-mobile)
The development of the child (mobile or non-mobile).
The different categories of medicines have different parent authorisation requirements, as set out in Appendix 2. For categories (i) and (iii), parent authorisation must be given at enrolment of the child at the service. Category (ii) medicines require daily parental authorisation. For category (i) medicines, services must be specific about what products they will use (including brand names).
The different categories of medicines have different parent authorisation requirements, as set out in Appendix 3. For categories (i) and (iii), parent authorisation must be given at enrolment of the child at the service. Category (ii) medicines require daily parental authorisation. For category (i) medicines, services must be specific about what products they will use (including brand names).
The different education agencies
The dispersal of group-owned assets (money and equipment) should be decided by remaining members of the group, in consultation with your Ministry of Education early childhood advisor.
The document does not exist or is unable to be found: section
The documentation required for this criterion is an inventory. An inventory is a list of items owned by the group. For easy use the inventory can be divided into areas: for example, furniture, books, indoor equipment, creative play, music, outdoor equipment and kitchen equipment.
The documented self-review and internal evaluation process should identify:
The dollar amount of funding that a service is paid for each funded child hour (FCH).
The door to the toilet or bathroom must be able to be independently opened by children and be kept unlocked at all times.
The draft framework for relationships and sexuality education (RSE) for Years 0 to 13 will be available for public feedback from this Friday 11 April to 9 May. The framework sets out the proposed RSE teaching to be covered in the NZC each year, with a focus on ensuring content is age-appropriate, evidence-informed, internationally comparable, and clear about what to teach and when.
The draft framework for the teaching of relationships and sexuality education (RSE) is available for public feedback until 9 May.
The driver must ensure that any child in their vehicle is safely secured in the right car seat.
The driver must report any inappropriate behaviour to the transport service provider, who will contact the bus controller or school.
The driver or transport service provider (TSP) is responsible for contacting emergency services immediately.
The duties for all bus controllers are set out in the school transport roles and responsibilities guide.
The early childhood curriculum,
The early childhood education knowledge base is constantly being revised and developed. Professional learning helps us to keep up to date with these changes. Participating in professional development opportunities (formal and informal) and reading helps us to continuously build on our understanding. Educators should take opportunities to discuss and debate ideas and theories and identify meaningful ways to put their new knowledge into practice.
The early childhood service must
The early childhood staff form is required to manage the Staff Hour Count.
The education network plans were released in 2022 and cover the rest of the country outside of the highest growth areas. These areas are a mixture of steady growth, stable or declining population areas. The NEGP has now been folded into the NENP. The updates show what we have been doing, what has changed, and which projects have been announced.
The education sector includes all early learning, schooling, and tertiary education provision.
The education system for schools is made up of 13-year levels.
The educator will continue to actively supervise all children present during the visit.
The effective date of a movement to a higher group following an improvement of qualification(s) is:
The electronic RS7 Return.
The employing organisation must carry out all of the other components of the safety checking process for certificated teachers.
The enrolment details will indicate if, and for how many hours, a child is receiving 20 Hours ECE at another service. This will tell each service how many 20 Hours ECE hours can be claimed for each child.
The enrolment records must distinguish and identify children who are permanently enrolled and those who may attend on a casual or conditional basis.
The enrolment zone for Alfriston School is proposed to remain unchanged. However, there will be an overlap between the proposed zone of Te Kura Rau Iti and the existing zone of Alfriston School. This means that some addresses may fall within the zones of both schools.
The environment, our expectations, and our teaching practices will be strong indicators of what we consider to be socially appropriate and competent behaviours.
The environment, our own, and parents and
The evacuation procedure must cover all emergency situations. The service provider is responsible for ensuring there is a procedure for each home.
The evaluation criteria and process are described in detail in the RFP for each tender.
The evaluation team evaluate offers made by suppliers and make a recommendation for a preferred supplier.
The evaluation team should have 3 or more people and may include:
The example annual plan is a starting point for how services can arrange key tasks in an annual plan.
The example below illustrates how the Three Week Rule Extension for Extended Non-Operation can be applied to a child enrolled for
The example below illustrates how the Three Week Rule Extension for extended non-operation can be applied to a child enrolled for 3 sessions or days per week:
The example below illustrates how the Three Week Rule Extension for extended non-operation can be applied to a child enrolled for 5 sessions or days per week:
The example below illustrates how the Three Week Rule can be applied to a child enrolled for
The example below illustrates how the Three Week Rule extension for extended non-operation can be applied to a child enrolled for 1 session or day per week:
The examples on the next 2 pages illustrate how the Three Week Rule can be applied to children enrolled for 1, 3 or 5 sessions per week.
The examples on the next page illustrate how the Three Week Rule Extension for Extended Non-Operation can be applied to children who have been absent for different periods prior to the period of non-operation.
The executive summary of this cabinet paper was translated into several languages, available on request.
The expectation is that each early childhood service will use
The experiences and opportunities available should:
The facility can be used by the service whenever it is required.
The facility is located close enough to the service to ensure that people who need to use it can do so without difficulty. This includes considerations of distance as well as comfort, such as not getting wet in bad weather.
The financial statements component of the annual report has a template with a format that you must use. The school annual financial statements page explains how to prepare these.
The fire evacuation scheme needs to include regular trial evacuations for fire emergencies. Fire Regulations require this to be done at least every 6 months, and that it is reported to Fire and Emergency New Zealand within 10 days of taking place. There is information about maintaining an approved evacuation scheme on the Fire and Emergency New Zealand website.
The first aid kit may also contain any category (i) medicines the service chooses to use, providing the appropriate written authority has been gained from parents (see criterion HS25).
The first aid kit may also contain any category (i) medicines the service chooses to use, providing the appropriate written authority has been gained from parents (see criterion HS28).
The first aid qualification must be refreshed every 2 years.
The following 4 salary scales should be used by services with regard to the minimum salary amounts from 1 November 2023:
The following ECE Census Service Information must be submitted to the Ministry:
The following ECE Census staff information must be submitted to the Ministry:
The following activities will help to ensure all adults are familiar with the emergency drill procedures:
The following activities will support all adults being with the emergency drill procedures:
The following activities will support you in ensuring that all adults are familiar with the emergency drill procedures:
The following activities will support you in ensuring that all adults are familiar with the evacuation procedures:
The following are examples of emergencies where funding will continue for a home-based service:
The following are examples of emergencies where funding will continue:
The following are prominently displayed at the service for parents and visitors:
The following are some measures centres might want to consider implementing to meet this ratio:
The following are useful things to take on an excursion:
The following are useful things to take with you on an excursion:
The following areas can be included in a supervision plan.
The following attendance information must be sent to the Ministry:
The following child information must be collected and sent to the Ministry:
The following diagram represents what funding rates will be paid for each response to the attestation question.
The following diagram represents what funding rates will be paid given the combination of answers to the attestation questions.
The following early learning service types are not eligible to receive Targeted Funding:
The following enrolment information must be collected and sent to the Ministry:
The following example shows how a service could claim funding where a child receiving 20 Hours ECE shares a child-place with an Under Two child.
The following examples are not emergencies:
The following examples are provided as a starting point to show how services can meet (or exceed) the requirement. Services may choose to use other approaches better suited to their needs as long as they comply with the criteria.
The following four salary scales should be used by services with regard to the minimum salary amounts from 1 November 2023:
The following information release contains:
The following is a list of things you may like to consider when estimating how many funded hours you will claim for under 2, and 2 and over:
The following languages are recognised for the PITA:
The following links provide guidance on how to best implement least privilege for Microsoft 365.
The following links provide guidance on how to set up admin roles and security best practices on Google Workspace.
The following list of policy documents will be updated as we continue to publish more material related to ETAB 2.
The following lists give suggestions for basic equipment in each area of play. Playgroups should refer to education advisors at their regional Ministry of Education office for more information.
The following may make it easier for children to use these facilities:
The following resources have been developed to help schools to embed the STAR in their practice.
The following salary scales should be used by services with regard to the minimum salary amounts from 1 January 2023 but prior to 1 November 2023. By paying at least these salary amounts to all employed certificated teachers, Education and Care and Hospital-based services are eligible for higher funding rates.
The following service information must be submitted to the Ministry:
The following service types are exempt from providing regular information on enrolments and attendance to the Ministry through ELI:
The following suggestions for equipment will help your group establish a broad-based play programme in your playgroup.
The following table details how the funding rate will be determined based on the salary requirements met by the service:
The following table shows an example of financial years and when the information should be sent in.
The following table shows how funding can be claimed for children who attend a service on a casual basis:
The following table shows the number of 20 Hours ECE hours and Plus 10 ECE hours per week that may be claimed for children with different enrolment agreements:
The following table shows the number of FCHs that may be claimed for children with different enrolment agreements:
The foreign country decides any visa or permit requirements.
The formal name and status (such as charitable trust or incorporated society) of the reporting entity.
The formal written agreement between a parent or guardian and a service that a specific child will attend that service at specified times. An enrolment can be permanent, casual or conditional.
The foundation for learning programmes for mokopuna in
The framework has 5 outcome domains. These outcome domains reflect key messages that we have heard from
The frequent absence problem is
The frequently asked questions document below has more information about the use of GenAI in NCEA assessment.
The full responsibilities for you, the driver and the school are explained in the guide below.
The funding goes to your early learning service or
The funding paid to licensed services is paid subject to the terms and conditions set out under this handbook and must be complied with. The terms used in this handbook are based in the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008.
The funding rate table shows the funding rates for each type of service. A copy of the table is included with this Handbook.
The funding rate table will be updated with any change in funding rates.
The funding rates are made up of basic and variable components.
The funding rates for all ECE services vary according to a range of costs usually faced by that service type.
The funding rules for parent-led days are explained in this chapter. The funding rules for teacher-led days are explained in Section 3-B.
The glossary defines shared facilities and adequate access.
The golden rule of access, also known as least privilege, means allowing users access only to what they need.
The governance, management, and administration standard: general is the standard that requires every licensed service provider to whom this regulation applies to ensure that:
The guidance and resources provided in the full Action Plan for Pacific Education can also be used by families and communities to further support their children to achieve their aspirations.
The guidance is a starting point to show how services can meet (or exceed) the requirement. Services may choose to use other approaches better suited to their needs as long as they comply with the criteria.
The guidance is provided as a starting point to show how services can meet the requirement. Services may choose to use other approaches better suited to their needs as long as they comply with the criteria.
The guidelines for Targeted Funding
The guidelines include a review tool to help services identify gaps in current policies, information about what to include in a new policy, as well as example policies including a policy used in an early childhood education setting.
The hand washing practices to be used. If relevant, the practices to be used when wearing disposable gloves.
The health and safety practices standard requires the service provider for every certified playgroup to take reasonable steps to:
The health and safety practices standard: general is the standard that requires every licensed service provider to whom this regulation applies to:
The health and safety standards of licensed early learning services are overseen by us. The Education Review Office (ERO) also looks at areas of health and safety.
The home of curriculum content, teaching materials, and news.
The home-based ECE service provider is responsible for ensuring their Persons responsible (Co-ordinator / visiting teacher) meet the requirements of Regulation 28(2)(c). They should have a documented policy or procedure that sets out their expectations of the Persons responsible (Co-ordinator / visiting teacher) in meeting the regulations and how they will be monitored.
The home-based educator top up payment must be no more than the difference between the pass-through and the hourly fee for each child for the hours outside of 20 Hours ECE.
The home-based educator top up payments can only be charged for the hours of 20 Hours ECE.
The home-based educator top up payments can only be charged for the hours of 20 hours ECE.
The hospital from which the service operates has been granted certification under the Health and Disability Services (Safety) Act 2001 either:
The hot water temperature from household taps can present a scalding hazard to children. Careful supervision is necessary for young children, and older children can be taught about hot water safety.
The hours Sione was absent in January if he continued to attend for less than 4 hours per enrolled day on more than half of his enrolled days in December and his enrolment agreement is not reconfirmed or changed.
The indicative maps of daily school bus routes are updated at the start of each school term.
The information below shows the record keeping requirements for Playcentres:
The information is legally privileged: sections
The information is or will soon be publicly available: section
The information kit is different from the English-medium toolkit. It includes:
The information on our social media sites and all government web sites is provided on the basis that persons accessing the website undertake responsibility for assessing the relevance and accuracy of its content.
The information provided through the secure data portal will be password protected.
The information they collect includes the date and time you visited the site, your IP address, the pages you accessed on our site, the search terms you used, details about your operating system (for example, Windows 7, Mac OSX) and your web browser (for example, Chrome, Mozilla Firefox, or Internet Explorer).
The information was provided in confidence: sections
The information we gathered has been used to inform our refresh of
The information we gathered has been used to inform our refresh of Ka Hikitia and Tau Mai Te Reo and the overall Education Work Programme.
The information would harm negotiations: sections
The information would harm the maintenance of the law because the matter is, or will be, before the courts (including the Coroner): sections
The information you are requesting must be specified with 'due particularity' meaning that the Ministry must be able to identify the information you have asked for.
The initial salary step for a certificated teacher appointed to a Management Position will be the K2, K3, K4 step on the Minimum Salary Scale for Management Positions.
The initial salary step should be agreed between the employer and teacher. The process for deciding it should be transparent and fair.
The intent of the attendance code decision tree is not
The intent of the criteria is to involve parents and caregivers in the operation of the playgroup.
The intent of this criteria is to ensure the health, safety and wellbeing of children is maintained.
The intent of this criteria is to keep children safe.
The intent of this criteria is to make sure there are adequate provisions for the treatment of minor injuries and that the first aid kit is accessible to adults but inaccessible to children.
The intention of this criteria is to ensure that adults and children have the knowledge to respond safely in an emergency.
The land and buildings (or parts of buildings) intended for the exclusive use as a licensed early childhood education and care centre during hours of operation.
The land and buildings (or parts of buildings) used by the playgroup.
The language level that a service attests to meeting is assessed across the entire service licence. The average amount of time spent teaching in a single Pacific language across the entire service will be used to determine the immersion or bilingual level.
The latest curriculum, assessment, and aromatawai news for schools and kura.
The learning and development of
The learning and development of mokopuna is enhanced when culturally appropriate ways of communicating are used and when parents and
The learning needs of children in hospital-based settings are likely to change rapidly and the educator needs to be particularly sensitive and responsive to this change.
The learning support team will work with other agencies to develop support plans alongside other services such as child development teams.
The level of funding paid to each eligible service is determined by:
The licensing criteria has guidance on what to do when another organisation does safety checking on your behalf.
The licensing criteria were last updated in September 2022.
The link below gives educators, coordinators, and service providers more information, advice, and guidance to support implementation of the licensing criteria.
The link between costs and funding rates: 2-5
The link between licensing and funding: 2-1
The links below give educators, coordinators, and service providers more information, advice, and guidance to support implementation of the licensing criteria.
The list below explains the records required by hospital-based services:
The location and type of artificial light should be carefully considered in the planning and design of an early childhood education and care centre and should consider the activities and purpose of each room.
The location of eligible students, and
The longer a password is, the stronger it is. You can also use special characters to make it even stronger, such as:
The main body of this document is divided into 3 sections. The first section explores the concept of review. The second section outlines the review process, and the third section invites us to reflect on our self-review process by considering the elements of effective review. Each section concludes with a series of questions to provoke our thinking.
The main objective of the Office of the Auditor-General is to improve the trust and confidence in the public sector, so we also do a raft of good practice guides as well to help the public sector improve. In terms of our annual audits, we have what we call a devolved model, so that means we appoint auditors from outside from across New Zealand, so that includes our own business unit Audit New Zealand and also external audit service providers. We currently have got about 60 appointed auditors who audit schools for us across the country.
The main purpose of a school exchange is educational. Programmes where travel is primarily for sporting, cultural or tourism activities are not exchanges.
The main, uh, the true intent of the truancy code is
The management and administration standard requires the service provider for every certified playgroup to ensure that:
The management group or governing board is responsible for writing a draft statement of philosophy. This should be circulated to as many stakeholders as possible to get their opinion. This can be done through a meeting or by doing a survey. Whatever method is best for your stakeholders.
The management plan is part of the procurement COI declaration form.
The maximum number of children on the licence certificate minus the maximum number of children under 2 (if any), plus the maximum number of adults required to meet adult to child ratios, divided by 15.
The measured route can be a combination of a public road or pedestrian route and may not be walkable or drivable in its entirety. ArcGIS can differ from other mapping software, such as Google Maps, which may map routes from different start and end points and may rely on different bases for waypoint location. They may be inaccurate for determining eligibility.
The method of tracking Certificated and Other Teacher Hours required by the Ministry for funding purposes.
The micro-organisms least likely to be killed by bleach or any other disinfectant are giardia and cryptosporidium. These organisms produce microscopic cysts that can stick onto surfaces. The best way to deal with these organisms is to use a good detergent. This means that frequent cleaning with detergent is best for toys, tables and other non-toilet surfaces rather than bleach.
The minimum salaries in this appendix represent a yearly salary calculated on the basis of a 40-hour employed week.
The most important part will be, how schools use this direction to develop their own school specific response to attendance.
The most popular password manager applications are:
The national curriculum covers subjects that are taught at primary and secondary schools and the standards students should reach in each subject.
The nature of hospital-based services means that many of the other record keeping requirements may not work for them.
The net book value of the assets disposed of at a loss needs to be separately set off on row S 97. We have entered minus $3,257 here. These adjustments help the cash flow model to calculate the cash receipts, if any, given to the school when they disposed of this surplus or obsolete assets.
The net book value of the assets disposed of at a surplus needs to be separately set off and cell S88.
The network of schools is all schools in New Zealand that we fund. It is made up of smaller regional networks of schools.
The new entrants' adjustment
The new service completes the RS3 form.
The new service is licensed.
The new service provider must contact their Ministry regional office so that the change of service provider can be verified.
The new service returns the RS3 form to their Ministry regional office.
The new service types were agreed on by Ministers in mid-2023. It will allow us to better identify and group these services, for more visible and meaningful reporting.
The next funding payment will include accurate wash-up funding based on actual funded child hour data submitted on the RS7 Return.
The next step is to ensure that you have all the components that make up the Annual Report.
The normal absence rules apply to these absences.
The number of codes were reduced from 26 to 15. No new codes were created.
The number of design reviews needed will depend on the size and risk profile for the project.
The number of school aged
The number of toilets needed for centres is calculated as follows:
The numbers of inbound and outbound students should equal by the end of the programme's approval period.
The objective of Component A: Low socio-economic communities is to target funding to ECE services that provide education and care programmes to children from low socio-economic communities.
The objective of Component B is to target funding to services that may have significant numbers of children with learning support needs or who are from non-English speaking backgrounds.
The objectives of Equity Funding are to:
The off-site setting must be appropriate for children. The educator must be able to deliver education and care to both the child being observed and the other children in their care, while at the same time engaging with the Person responsible for professional development support purposes. A cafe, for example, would not be suitable. If the observation is to take place at a playgroup, neither the educator nor the Persons responsible (Co-ordinator / visiting teacher) can run the playgroup. It must be run by someone else
The offsite manufacturing supplier panel is a list of suppliers that we have pre-approved to help us build and deliver quality learning spaces.
The onboarding and offboarding procedures including notifying the IT lead of:
The operation and administration of individual
The operation and decision making of each
The opportunity for restful sleep is provided by the centre having a designated space where fluctuations in temperature, noise and lighting levels can be minimised. Adequate supervision of sleeping children is required.
The options are identified below.
The original cost of the assets disposed of are added back at cost in column S Rows 164 to 172.
The outdoor environment is accessible for all children and offers varying degrees of physical challenge and managed risk including opportunities for children to exercise their gross and fine motor skills in this environment.
The overview document describes how to use the 4 modules with students. It explains why it is important to notice student distress at the earliest stage and respond to this distress in mana-enhancing ways, rather than resort to using physical restraint which is a last resort.
The parent or caregiver of the ineligible student must:
The parts of the hospital where children participating in the service receive early childhood education and care.
The password will be the MoE number of the person who is paid using the designation code 'S01' as at pay period 21. This is the principal designation code.
The pay parity guide explains how to work out the right salary steps.
The pay parity opt-in scheme is a funding scheme for education and care services including hospital-based services.
The pay parity opt-in scheme is a funding scheme for education and care services, including hospital-based services.
The pay parity opt-in scheme seeks to address the disparity in pay between certificated
The payroll information will be provided in 2 ways.
The percentage of students attending regularly is very low in New Zealand compared to many other countries. Lifting school attendance is crucial for future success.
The permission to reproduce material protected by Crown copyright on this site, does not extend to any material that is identified as being copyright to a third party.
The person (or people) responsible for having the role of providing day-to-day care for the child.
The person certifying your document(s) must:
The person or entity preparing or compiling the general purpose financial statements or special purpose financial report cannot also audit the statements or report.
The person or persons who operate the playgroup.
The person responsible must be able to guide and support staff to deliver the curriculum.
The person responsible must have:
The person responsible must:
The person responsible provides educators with professional leadership and support. This gives educators access to a qualified and certificated teacher who can respond to any questions or concerns they have while they provide education and care for children enrolled in the service.
The person responsible requirements must be met at all times children are attending, much like adult-to-child ratios.
The person responsible role
The person who has primary responsibility for overseeing the education and care, comfort, and health and safety of the children in a home-based service, and for providing professional leadership and support to educators within the service.
The person who has primary responsibility for overseeing the education and care, comfort, and health and safety of the children, and providing professional leadership and support to educators within the service.
The person with the designated role of providing education and care directly to children in his or her care, and attends to the health and safety of those children.
The plan identifies 5 key shifts and a set of actions that are needed to achieve this vision:
The plan must be specific to the premises and the number, age, abilities and enrolled hours of the children attending and must show how the educator will actively supervise children attending the service. It must include, but is not limited to:
The plan should also include any additional supervision that may be required to address risks identified in the risk assessment process.
The play materials and experiences that are available in the playgroup provide ways in which the ideas in the principles and strands of
The policy covers the identification and reporting of child abuse and neglect. There must be information about how the service will keep children safe from abuse and neglect. It must also outline how the service will respond to suspected child abuse and neglect.
The policy is required under the Children's Act 2014.
The policy must be reviewed every 3 years.
The policy must outline processes for the identification and reporting of child abuse and neglect under the Children and Young persons and their Families Act 1989.
The policy needs to be consistent with advice provided by
The possible uses of GenAI in assessment contexts are therefore more limited than in teaching and learning contexts.
The practice framework for Ministry and RTLB learning support practitioners.
The premises and facilities standard requires the service provider for every certified playgroup to operate from premises that are:
The premises and facilities standard: general is the standard that requires every licensed service provider to whom this regulation applies
The premises and facilities standard: general is the standard that requires every licensed service provider to whom this regulation applies:
The premises are kept at a comfortable temperature while children are attending.
The premises are located in a building that has a current fire evacuation scheme approved by Fire and Emergency New Zealand.
The premises conform to any relevant bylaws of the local authority and the Building Act 2004.
The premises conform to any relevant bylaws of the local authority. Any premises undergoing alterations conform to the Building Act 2004.
The prescribed curriculum framework for the Early Learning Sector is in 3 parts:
The presence of any child during licensed hours who is aged 13 years or younger, who is enrolled at school, and who is counted towards the total number of children that can be present in the home, in line with the requirements set out in section 19 of the Education and Training Act 2020.
The presence of any small parts that could be a choking hazard
The presence of any small parts that could be a choking hazard.
The primary form of government funding for early childhood education services.
The primary purpose of an activity room is to facilitate group activity and the provision of play experiences that cannot be easily taken to the child at their bedside.
The primary responsibility for transporting children to and from school or their school bus stop rests with their caregivers. They are best placed to decide the safest way to do this.
The primary responsibility for transporting children to and from school or their school bus stop rests with their parents and caregivers. You are best placed to decide the safest way to do this.
The principal and board chair sign the statement of responsibility and letter of representation.
The principle of authenticity means that students are required to demonstrate their own knowledge, understanding, and skills in NCEA assessment events. Any evidence submitted for assessment must be their own work.
The procedure aims to ensure:
The procedure could be displayed at the playgroup and pointed out to new parents and/or included in information packs. It is also a good idea to provide relevant reading material in the playgroup's adult library. Procedures should be reviewed on a regular basis so new families have the opportunity to contribute to their development.
The procedure ensures that children:
The procedure for people with complaints about any instance of non-compliance must include the option for people to contact the regional Ministry of Education office, with appropriate contact details.
The procedure should cover what action will be taken if an educator/coordinator is under the influence of alcohol or any other substance. This is a staff management issue, and appropriate procedures need to be followed such as processes for managing serious misconduct. See the guidance for GMA6 Human resource management.
The procedure should state:
The process examined annual, bereavement, family violence, alternative or sick leave and public holidays.
The process for uploading the Excel version of the annual financial statements is the same as for uploading the PDF annual report.
The process is consistent with criterion GMA4/GMA3 and includes a schedule showing timelines for planned review of different areas of operation.
The procurement leader endorses the plan.
The procurement leader reviews and endorses all procurement documents and decisions.
The procurement of bus services provided by us was a 2-tender approach. This allowed fair access to government contracts for suppliers of all sizes.
The procurement officer drafts up the plan using the appropriate template.
The procurement officer prepares the procurement plan using one of our templates. It outlines:
The procurement officer writes a report to summarise the evaluation process and recommend a supplier. You can use our template to write this report.
The procurement owner endorses the contract.
The procurement owner endorses the plan.
The procurement owner endorses the recommendation report, and the procurement sponsor approves it. The procurement leader does not need to endorse the report for stage 1.
The procurement owner represents the buyer in the procurement. They review and endorse all procurement documents prepared by the procurement officer (project manager).
The procurement sponsor approves the plan.
The procurement sponsor must provide written approval for the purchase.
The procurement sponsor reviews and approves:
The procurement sponsor reviews and signs the contract.
The progress report for the quarter ending June 2024 shows:
The project manager remains actively involved in the project.
The proposed 3 changes are that the Teaching Council must:
The proposed change is to amend Schedule 24 of the Act to more clearly allocate NSNs for researchers, and for research and funding purposes. This allows the current use of NSNs for the Performance Based Research Fund (PBRF). It also allows retrospective validation to make sure the previously collected dataset could be used consistently.
The proposed change to the Act would mean that universities:
The provision of water should be included on the daily checks carried out be staff/adults at the centre.
The provisional licence must be displayed clearly for
The provisions of the Building Act 2004 do not apply to homes built prior to 1992 that have not since been renovated. The Ministry of Education will not require code of compliance certificates for every home. If recent building work has been undertaken, then the service provider should ask for a copy of the code of compliance certificate.
The publication of the criteria on its own can be downloaded and printed.
The publication of the criteria on its own can be downloaded as a PDF and printed.
The published information includes key documents and decisions that relate to this work.
The purpose of a funding claim audit is to:
The purpose of the safety check that was done (for example what role).
The purpose of this allowance is to:
The purpose of this criteria is to ensure that environmental hazards are regularly checked and addressed.
The purpose of this priority is to strengthen the learning support system so we can respond better to the needs of learners and their families through evidence-based approaches and targeted investment for equitable educational outcomes.
The purpose of today's session really is to outline, uh,
The qualification requirements for different types of centres are set out by us.
The quantity of first aid items you will need to store in your kit will depend upon:
The rates, per annum per certificated
The rates, per annum per certificated teacher, are:
The rationale for observing a child outside the home must be recorded.
The recognised qualifications are:
The recommendation report goes to the procurement owner and procurement leader for endorsement.
The recommendation report is then passed on to the procurement sponsor for approval. The sponsor must consider:
The record must include trained parents/
The record of medicine administered to children should be kept for 2 years.
The record should include:
The recording of category (i) medicines administered in relation to injuries as required by criterion HS22 will meet this requirement for those medicines.
The recording of category (i) medicines administered in relation to injuries as required by criterion HS25 will meet this requirement for those medicines.
The refreshed Ka Hikitia strategy visual (A3) - June 2020
The regulations require all services to have a person responsible available to support educators for all hours children are attending. Teachers accessing this provision cannot be used to avoid this obligation, therefore they cannot fulfil the role of person responsible while waiting for recertification.
The regulations require that all (i.e. 100% of) educators either hold a home-based service qualification, or within 6 months of starting with a home-based service are working towards the qualification.
The relevant records must be provided at the site of the audit when an audit is taking place.
The remainder (up to 30 hours) may be claimed as Plus 10 ECE hours.
The remediation process has comprised highly detailed data corrections and recalculations to check that Ministry employees have received at least their minimum entitlements under the Holidays Act 2003.
The report is organised around the 5 Ka Hikitia outcome domains and the measures that underpin each of the domains.
The report shows how school boards have applied their financial resources to achieve the goals set out in their strategic plan in the previous year.
The reporting mechanism may be decided at the discretion of individual services (or the service provider). Each service must include the following information in their annual audited general purpose financial statements or special purpose financial report:
The request for a review should be sent to
The required adult: child ratios are based on the number of children participating at any 1 time at the service.
The required qualifications for auditors are defined in s36 of the Financial Reporting Act 2013.
The requirement to ensure that human resource management practices are implemented is underpinned by Regulations 47(1)(a) and 47(1)(e). These require service providers to ensure that the service is effectively governed, is managed in accordance with good management practices and all reasonable steps are taken to provide staff employed or engaged in the service with adequate professional support, professional development opportunities and resources.
The requirement to provide attendance data daily will not apply to specified
The requirements are set out in Regulation 44 and the Second Schedule of the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008.
The requirements in this chapter do not apply to hospital-based services. Requirements for hospital-based services can be found in Chapter 3.
The resourcing roll for primary, full primary, and composite schools includes a new entrant adjustment.
The responsibility for the assessment of risk for any excursion lies with the service, and parents should give written approval to the excursion and the proposed ratios.
The responsibility for the assessment of risk lies with the service, and parents should also take responsibility by giving their written approval to the excursion and the proposed ratios.
The result of the safety check is confidential and the service provider and only those staff delegated with responsibilities that would require them to access the information should be able to do so.
The review of EQI process is available once a year. For more information, contact the Resourcing Contact Centre on
The role and responsibilities of the
The role of the person responsible is set out in Regulation 61.
The role of workers and others in your school will determine the types of child safety checks you need to complete. This document sets out these roles.
The route map information was accurate at the time of publication and is subject to change.
The safety check must be completed by the employing organisation (which may be the playgroup itself). The playgroup needs to confirm that the safety check has been completed if the safety check has been done by the employing organisation.
The salary scale defines the minimum salary levels for a certificated teacher employed at an education and care service or hospital-based service.
The salary scales for certificated teachers are:
The salary scales shown reflect the base salary for an employed certificated teacher. Bonuses, non-cash, or in-kind benefits cannot be counted towards the minimum salary requirements.
The salary steps required to be attested to in order for a service to receive extended parity funding rates.
The salary steps required to be attested to in order for a service to receive full parity funding rates.
The salary steps required to be attested to in order for a service to receive the parity funding rates.
The scheme has educational and intercultural value.
The scheme is designed in a way that supports sustainability and long-term viability of the scheme.
The scheme provides higher funding rates to education and care and hospital-based services who pay all employed certificated
The school and supplier each keep a signed copy of the contract.
The school has to confirm to us that your child is boarding. They then pay it to the hostel or caregiver your child is boarding with.
The school is the closest state or state-integrated school the student can enrol at.
The school planning and reporting framework
The school staffing cycle
The school's responsibilities are to:
The section 6-3 in the ECE funding handbook details what is required in keeping attendance records. Attendance records may be kept in a form to suit the service.
The service becomes part of the normal funding cycle. Funding continues as for all services (see section 2-5 for more details).
The service can still operate on a provisional licence.
The service completes and returns the EC20 to the ECE Operational Funding team by email to
The service curriculum is consistent with any prescribed curriculum framework that applies to the service.
The service curriculum is print-focused:
The service curriculum provides opportunities for children to play together for sustained periods in groups of their own choosing.
The service curriculum provides opportunities to discuss and negotiate rights, fairness and justice with adults.
The service curriculum reflects the holistic way that children learn.
The service curriculum respects and supports the right of each child to be confident in their own culture and encourages children to understand and respect other cultures.
The service curriculum treats all children, regardless of their age, gender, ethnicity and abilities, as competent and confident learners who are active participants in their own learning. Supportive, responsive educators guide children to make choices in, and contribute to the planning of, the programme in an early childhood service.
The service has at least 1 toilet for every 1 to 15 persons. Persons are defined as children aged 2 and older and teaching staff that count towards the required adult:child ratio.
The service is for getting to and from school only. We will consider transport between multiple addresses and your child's school if:
The service needs to have a procedure for hygienic preparation of bottles including:
The service philosophy and practices reflect commitment to a bicultural partnership.
The service provider contact person can request a review of any audit findings in the report. The request must be filed within 20 working days of the receipt of the audit letter advising of the audit findings.
The service provider holds overarching responsibility for compliance with all regulatory requirements, including the requirements associated with the person responsible role. They are expected to provide the person responsible with enough information and support to make sure they understand their role and can carry out their duties effectively.
The service provider holds overarching responsibility for compliance with regulatory requirements, including the person responsible requirements. They are expected to provide the person responsible with sufficient information and support to ensure they understand their role and can carry out their duties effectively.
The service provider is the body, or agency that, or person who operates the early childhood education service. Where a service is part of an association or larger group of services, funding is paid to the service provider.
The service provider must ensure parents do not pay a fee for hours covered by 20 Hours ECE, either to the service provider or to the educator.
The service provider must record:
The service provider must tell parents and caregivers:
The service provider or centre will need to carry out all of the other components of the safety checking process for certificated teachers.
The service requests an EC20 transitional advance form from the Ministry of Education team at
The service should identify the best method of communicating with for each
The service will be required to update their attestation and allowance application if their staffing changes at any time.
The service's ECE professional leader (i.e. the coordinator).
The service's ECE professional leader, (ie, the person responsible).
The set of funding rates available to education and care services and hospital-based services that do not pay all employed certificated teachers according to the full salary scale criteria described in section 3-B-2.
The size and contents of your kit will depend on how big your group is, where you meet, and how far away you are from professional medical assistance in an emergency. In most cases, a basic pre-prepared kit will be sufficient (you can get them from chemists or supermarkets), or you can have a look at the first aid kit contents required for licensed services.
The size and layout of your infant/toddler spaces will depend on the number of children under 2 in the centre, and how it will be used.
The sleep procedure must be displayed so all adults at the service understand what is expected and parents know what will occur.
The softer furnishings you have, the more sound is absorbed.
The space between sleep furniture/items needs to allow adults to:
The space between sleep furniture/items needs to allow the educator to easily check on children, ensure they are not too hot or cold, and check their breathing and enables the educator or other adults to move between them quickly in an emergency.
The specific reporting mechanism is at the discretion of the individual service (or service provider). However, the following minimum standards are required:
The staffing record is used by the Ministry to verify that the correct number of Certificated Teacher Hours has been claimed.
The start dates are set by the Minister of Education. Schools using cohort entry must use these dates and cannot change them.
The starting point for the guidelines,
The statement of philosophy tells everyone who works or comes into your premises what is special about your service and what you want to achieve.
The steps below show one way you could complete your Staff Record and Staff Hour Count.
The steps on the KidsHealth page 'What to do if your baby chokes' outlines the appropriate response if a child is choking.
The strategy is supported by 4 objectives.
The student is experiencing significant hardship in their local school environment (Multiple Barrier Allowance).
The student lives more than a certain distance from the school.
The style of financial statements that must be completed by community- based services. They should include statements of:
The suitability of the outdoor space to provide the outcomes for children will be assessed on a case-by-case basis, taking into account the practicalities and risks of each case under the provisions of Regulation 54(3) of the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008.
The supplier signs 2 copies of the contract.
The survey will be open until 11 May 2025.
The suspension notice will state:
The table below outlines the reporting areas that can be consolidated and those that must be itemised (i.e. reported individually for each service).
The table below shows how parents could choose to allocate the 20 Hours ECE hours daily across a week:
The table below shows the sections of the RS7 return your service will receive and the pages in this Chapter where instructions can be found:
The tables below contain a list of all the resources and examples in this appendix.
The term all employed, in relation to the Minimum Salary Scale for Certificated Teachers, means all certificated teachers who are permanently employed either on a part-time or full-time basis to work in a teaching or management role in the service (i.e., they are working for hire or reward under a contract of service).
The term excludes teachers who are fixed term or casual employees or teachers employed by a third party and used by services through a contract with the third party.
The terms of use apply to all of our social media accounts.
The terms of use for ChatGPT and any services using it are clear: you must not send it any personal information of anyone under the age of 13.
The third thing is annually we do a report to the Ministry of Education on the results of the school audits, and we also publish that on our website, and that comes out usually around November in the year of audit.
The time and space involved in hygienically washing dishes by this method means centres using large quantities of dishes should consider installing a dishwasher instead (especially if they do not have designated kitchen staff).
The times of rest periods (for example structured or according to the needs of the individual child).
The tips for food safety on the
The tool is expected to be ready for use by Term 1 next year, with training and support to help you use it being held during Term 4 this year. Schools and kura can continue to use e-asTTle while the new tool is in development.
The toolkit sets out the requirements of your planning and reporting documents.
The total amount of Targeted Funding received.
The total amount of funding paid to each licensed service in March, July or November.
The total number of hours worked by all regulated (ratio) staff in a service on each day.
The total number of hours worked by certificated teachers in a service when they are counted towards regulated (ratio) staff.
The training is an unjustified absence.
The training takes up to 2 hours.
The transitional advance form (EC20) is used to calculate advance funding for services in a number of situations such as:
The transparency statement explains how we collect, use and share information gathered about individuals and organisations for the purposes of carrying out our statutory functions under the Education and Training Act 2020.
The transport provider may charge ineligible students a fare. The provider determines the amount and method of payment.
The trigger point is different depending on year level.
The type and quantity of furniture, equipment, and materials will differ from one playgroup to another. Children should be able to access equipment and materials that support their interests, skills and abilities.
The type of equipment or appliances needed for cooking and/or heating food will depend upon the number of children you are cooking for, and the type of meals being prepared. Options include microwaves, stove tops and ovens.
The type of financial report that must be supplied to the Ministry depends on the ownership structure of the service.
The type of supervision required depends on the layout of the premises, activities being undertaken, equipment being used, the ratio of adults to children, and the number, ages and needs of children.
The understandings, patterns of behaviour, practices and values shared by a group of people.
The understandings, patterns of behaviour, practices, and values shared by a group of people.
The unique reference number from the communication we sent you.
The use of 'we' in this document signifies an inclusive approach to self-review as all members of the early childhood education learning community have opportunities to participate.
The use of GenAI is not permitted in NCEA external assessment.
The use of portable orange netting, cones and walking ropes can be useful for keeping children together while moving and once they have reached the final place of safety.
The use of specific tools for reporting on learner progress is not required in 2025. Schools and kura are encouraged to continue using available standardised assessment tools.
The use of technology does not reduce the requirement to physically enter the room and check on the sleeping child at least every 10 to 15 minutes and record these checks.
The value of the procurement determines the approach and documents you need to use.
The vast majority of children and students attend their local school or early learning centre and learn and achieve alongside their peers.
The way the experiences and opportunities associated with these types of play are made available to children, and they ways that adults interact and respond to children as they play should reflect the principles and strands of
The way we use roll counts to determine your operational funding entitlement varies by school or kura type, and which instalment it is.
The ways in which each early childhood education service works with the curriculum framework will vary. Each service will continue to develop its own curriculum and programmes that reflect the things that are important to the children, their families, the staff, the community and the philosophy of the specific setting. It is important for services to be able to identify how everything we do in an early childhood setting works towards meeting the curriculum framework for the children and families that attend.
The weathertightness design requirements apply to all new state school buildings, including:
The website from which you got to this page is protected by Cloudflare. Email addresses on that page have been hidden in order to keep them from being accessed by malicious bots.
The whole of the environment, indoors and outdoors, is used as a learning resource.
The whole of the environment, indoors and outdoors, is used as a learning resource. Educators provide opportunities for exploration, curiosity, and for mokopuna to test working theories.
The written authority for categories (i) and (iii) medicines is on the enrolment form so must be kept for 7 years. For category (ii) medicines, the written authority should be kept for as long as the child is receiving that medicine.
The written emergency plan must cover all emergency situations relevant to the location of the playgroup such as fire, earthquake, tsunami, flood, storm, volcano, landslide and so on. The plan has a broader scope than just fire evacuation.
The written emergency plan should include at least:
The years of experience of a certificated
The years of experience of a certificated teacher includes all previous experience as a certificated teacher in a teaching role and management position in a Pacific immersion or bilingual environment within New Zealand.
The, these will be running for the next, um,
The, uh, guidelines themselves, um, won't be static.
The, uh, second to that, this meeting will be recorded,
The, um, what I wanted to touch on here as well is for the
The, what we will see, what we are going to do,
Their actual pay will depend on whether the service has opted into the extended or full parity salary scale.
Their ideas and comments should be included in the final statement before it is circulated again. It may be necessary to go back to each of the groups to make sure that everyone is happy with the final statement of philosophy. Statements of philosophy do not have to be long, but they do need to be clear about why the service exists and what it stands for.
Their key objectives for Targeted Funding.
Then with an air of determination she lifted the handle as high as she could leaning way back and when all 4 wheels were off the ground, she carried the whole buggy inside. Puffing from the exertion Tessa dropped the buggy as soon as she was inside. Then she quickly pushed it around in a circle and straight back outside onto the deck where she circled round for another run at the entrance.
Then you can fill in the application.
Then, carry out each of these drills at least every 3 months. Most drills will be practiced by staff with children, the exceptions are lockdown and in some instances tsunami.
There are 2 funding rates for parent/
There are 2 types of dishwashers available: domestic and commercial. Each has its own advantages and disadvantages, and services need to consider which is right for them.
There are 2 types of funding for playgroups:
There are 220 established
There are 3 service delivery options for home-based ECE services during the Christmas period.
There are 4 qualification groups, with set criteria for each.
There are 4 types of payments. They are fees, donations, optional charges and home-based educator top up payments.
There are a number of legal child protection requirements your school must follow.
There are a number of resources available on the safety of household water from water tanks and bores.
There are a number of ways children can dry their hands, but some are more hygienic and easier to use than others. Viruses and bacteria spread easily from one child to another when they share the same towel. Getting hands dry is important. Damp hands create damp surfaces, which encourages survival of bacteria, viruses and organisms like Giardia.
There are a range of options to control room temperature, but safety of children is paramount.
There are a variety of reasons why we collect personal information, including:
There are a written emergency plan and supplies to ensure the care and safety of children and adults at the service. The plan must include evacuation procedures for the service's premises, which apply in a variety of emergency situations, and which are consistent with the fire evacuation scheme for the building.
There are a written emergency plan and supplies to ensure the care and safety of the children and educator at the home and when away from the home. The plan must include evacuation procedures that apply in a variety of emergency situations and that are relevant to the home.
There are additional duties for
There are additional record keeping requirements for services offering 20 Hours ECE. These can be found in Chapter 4.
There are additional recordkeeping requirements for services offering 20 Hours ECE. These can be found in Chapter 4.
There are additional requirements services must meet in order to receive this funding.
There are also group supervision qualification requirements as set out in the ECE Funding Handbook.
There are also guidelines for the requirements to have a person who is responsible at an early learning service.
There are also guidelines to follow about changing nappies.
There are different ways this could be achieved, depending on the age of the children attending the home. These include:
There are different ways to provide drinking water to ensure children maintain an adequate hydration level. These include:
There are facilities (or appropriate arrangements in place) for hygienic handwashing and drying in any ECE activity room.
There are facilities for the hygienic preparation, storage and/or serving of food and drink that contain:
There are four types of funding covered in this Handbook including ECE Funding Subsidy, 20 Hours ECE, Equity Funding and Annual Top-Up for Isolated Services (ATIS).
There are guidelines for creating safe sleeping areas and washing linen.
There are hygienic facilities (other than those required by PF18) or alternative arrangements available for the preparation and cleaning up of paint and other art materials.
There are hygienic facilities (other than those used for body wash) or alternative arrangements available for the preparation and cleaning up of paint and other art materials.
There are items that first aid kits should include to meet the requirements of centre-based ECE licensing criterion PF28.
There are items that first aid kits should include to meet the requirements of home-based ECE licensing criterion PF15.
There are legal requirements that must be met to operate any premises as an early childhood service.
There are many different options for early learning in New Zealand for children from birth up to 6 years old.
There are many possible approaches to Pacific Languages in Education, including bilingual and immersion education, teaching Pacific languages within the New Zealand Curriculum and supporting community education
There are new modules to support school boards to meet their legal requirement for supporting teachers on recognising and responding to student distress.
There are no public transport options available.
There are no requirements for how you engage a supplier. We do recommend you get a written quote.
There are numerous situations in a hospital-based setting where information and guidance from outside agencies and specialist services can enhance the ability of a child to fully access the curriculum and therefore improve their educational outcomes. Support and assistance may be focused on an individual child and
There are regular opportunities provided for parents to share their goals for their child with educators.
There are regulations about food safety that early learning services have to follow. These include food allergies, types of foods and how they can be served.
There are resources available that are designed specifically for young people to use themselves.
There are rules around how toilet and washing areas are designed and used.
There are safe and comfortable (indoor and outdoor) spaces for infants, toddlers or children not walking to lie, roll, creep, crawl, pull themselves up, learn to walk and to be protected from more mobile children.
There are safe and comfortable spaces for infants, toddlers or children not walking to lie, roll, creep, crawl, pull themselves up, learn to walk, and be protected from more mobile children.
There are safe and comfortable spaces in any ECE activity room for infants, toddlers, or children not walking to lie, roll, creep, crawl, pull themselves up, learn to walk, and to be protected from more mobile children.
There are several reasons why the media team may refuse to provide all or some of the information requested by the media. These are set out below.
There are several work programmes underway to deliver the priorities and reach our achievement target:
There are some occasions in which it is acceptable to observe a child in an alternative location.
There are spaces for the safe storage of children's play equipment, personal belongings, cleaning materials, and confidential administrative records.
There are spaces for the safe storage of equipment and materials.
There are start dates at the beginning and middle of each school term.
There are sufficient spaces for equipment and material to be stored safely. Stored equipment and materials can be easily and safely accessed by adults, and where practicable, by children.
There are teacher certification requirements for education and care services, hospital-based services and kindergartens.
There are times when the media team cannot provide the information requested. This is either because there is a good reason under the Act for refusing the request or because of the time it will take to provide the information.
There is a cost involved, but they have several advantages:
There is a cost to applicants for this service. To find out more, go to CV Check.
There is a dedicated NELP page on
There is a first aid kit containing basic first aid supplies for minor injuries that may occur at the group. The kit is:
There is a first aid kit that:
There is a lot to get to cover today.
There is a maximum of 22 operational days in September.
There is a plumbing fixture (such as a shower, shub or bath) for washing sick or soiled children.
There is a range of options, but safety of children is paramount. See HS11 Hazard management.
There is a safe and hygienic place for children attending to sit when eating.
There is a set amount of teaching time that schools must be open for each year. Having flexible dates allows each school to meet this requirement and accommodate local events and teacher-only days.
There is a specific evacuation plan for the sleep room where there are multi-level cots (HS7)
There is a specific process and timeframe schools must follow to allocate out-of-zone places. Schools and
There is a supervision criterion which all home-based services must meet. Refer to HS34 for requirements and guidance.
There is a template that services can use to record the required information.
There is a toilet and hygienic handwashing and drying facilities suitable for the use of children attending.
There is a toilet and hygienic handwashing and drying facilities suitable for the use of the children attending.
There is a written child protection policy that meets the requirements of the Children's Act 2014. The policy contains provisions for the identification and reporting of child abuse and neglect, and information about how the service will keep children safe from abuse and neglect, and how it will respond to suspected child abuse and neglect.
There is additional information on the parents' section of our website, including:
There is also a part of the application that must come from the school.
There is an adult present at all times for every 25 children attending (or part thereof) that:
There is an adult present at all times for every 25 children attending (or part thereof) who:
There is an adult present, at all times while children are attending, who:
There is an outdoor activity space that is:
There is at least 1 tap delivering warm water (over an individual or shared handbasin) for every 15 persons (or part thereof) at the service (that is to say, children attending and adults counting towards the required adult:child ratio).
There is more information on the playground safety standard and a handbook for ECE services to download.
There is more work to do to support Pacific Languages in Education in Aotearoa. In this Action Plan, we have identified the first wave of actions to provide a platform for growth. It will be necessary to update these actions on an ongoing basis.
There is no minimum space requirement for this area to meet the criterion to allow flexibility for services.
There is no requirement that the continuous service in a teaching role is at 1 service.
There is no suitable school within reasonable travel distance of where the student lives (Access Barrier Allowance).
There is now a dedicated NELP page on
There is significant domestic and international evidence that learners who are supported in their community languages achieve improved education and wellbeing outcomes.
There is some new terminology that you, um,
There is space (away from where food is stored, prepared, or eaten) where a sick child can:
There is space available for the restful sleep of children who need it at any time they are attending.
There is space for adults working at the service to:
There may be a fee for joining the waiting list.
There may be costs associated with calling an ambulance. Centres should plan in advance for this contingency.
There may be costs associated with calling an ambulance. Services should plan in advance for this contingency.
There may be exceptions to this. Contact your Ministry regional office for more details.
There must also be a suitably qualified 'person responsible' at each service. They are responsible for the day-to-day education and care, comfort and health and safety of the children at your service.
There must always be 1 first aid kit at the centre, and having a second kit to take on excursions will be necessary if some children remain at the centre during excursions.
There must be 1 person responsible for every 50 children.
There must be adequate ventilation in every room in the home that is used by children. Good ventilation is particularly important for rooms children sleep in, where nappies are changed, and bathrooms.
There needs to be adequate space and facilities to prepare and clean up paint and other art materials. A laundry tub would be appropriate for art preparation and clean up. Bathroom facilities are not appropriate.
There needs to be adequate space and facilities to prepare and clean up paint and other art materials. Body wash facilities must not be used for art preparation and clean up.
There service has at least 1 toilet for every 1 to 15 persons. Persons are defined as children aged 2 and older and teaching staff that count towards the required adult:child ratio.
There should also be opportunities for
There should also be opportunities for educators and coordinators to engage in professional reading and to discuss and debate ideas and theories, identifying meaningful ways to put their new knowledge into practice.
There should be no parts smaller than a ping-pong ball, no sharp or rough edges and no parts that are easily broken off.
There was the, um, there was the website
There will be hospital policy covering adults who may not have access to a child. Unless a court order rules otherwise, all parents and guardians are entitled to:
There will be limits on some schools' ability to accommodate these final two points, particularly depending on its size and location. It is up to the board to decide on their relevance and applicability.
There will need to be adequate hygienic storage for this purpose. You will also need to ensure that the storage does not create hazards to children but is easily accessible to the educator. For bedding, this could be in the linen cupboard.
Therefore, it is a form of unjustified absence truant.
These 4 service types were introduced in May 2025.
These Ministry of Education documents were produced during the development of policy to strengthen academic freedom and freedom of expression in universities.
These accounts need to have different, unique, and strong passwords.
These activities can be done on easels, table tops or the floor.
These all support better indoor environments.
These are all forms of alternative provision.
These are iterative, dynamic documents, which are regularly refreshed and refined as forecasts and situations change.
These are just some examples of ways that Component A Equity Funding can be used.
These are just some of the ways Component D Equity Funding can be used.
These are just some of the ways that Component B equity funding can be used.
These are just some of the ways that Component C Equity Funding can be used.
These are minimum salary scales, and services can choose to pay their teachers above these rates.
These are not the only situations where the Frequent Absence Rule should be applied.
These are set out as part of the service's licensing requirements.
These are the criteria about administering medicine to children at early learning services.
These are the main report templates you will need for your submissions.
These are the resourcing rolls we use to calculate your operational funding instalments.
These are the standard terms and conditions for school-led procurement.
These are the unit standards that provide a first aid qualification that meet the requirements of the licensing criteria.
These centres are licensed in accordance with the Education and Training Act 2020 under the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008, which prescribe minimum standards that each licensed service must meet. Licensing criteria are used to assess how the centres meet the minimum standards required by the regulations.
These could be completed at a tertiary education provider, or a vocational pathway such as workplace training.
These could be displayed on a notice board so they are clearly visible and can be read by parents/
These forms, along with supporting documentation, must be retained by the service.
These guidelines will help home-based ECE services understand how to meet the requirements of regulation 28(2)(c). They were developed in consultation with representatives of the home-based ECE sector and replace previously published information on this topic.
These guidelines will help home-based ECE services understand how to meet the requirements of regulation 44 (1)(d)(ii).
These higher salary scales can be paid to qualified, certificated teachers and also to teachers in management roles.
These indicative route maps do not cover all school bus services. These maps exclude:
These key documents offer background information on the Highest Needs Review.
These might look different to what is offered for
These options can also be viewed in infographics on the Playcentre Aotearoa website.
These pages contain instructions about how to complete a task, for example filling out your RS7 Return.
These pages help you find your way around the handbook.
These pathways will include bilingual early learning services, bilingual and immersion provision in primary schools, opportunities for teaching these languages as subjects in primary and secondary education, including NCEA, and pathways into tertiary education.
These priorities set the direction for our work programmes and how we will assist schools and
These programmes are government-funded and free.
These records must be kept by, or available to, the service provider as long as the person is employed or engaged.
These requirements are part of your licence and come under the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008.
These resources are templates and starters for schools to use and adjust for communicating with parents. They include topics like:
These resources from trusted sources can help you learn more about GenAI.
These scholarships provide financial assistance to Pacific students who are enrolled at tertiary education institutions in New Zealand.
These schools can have an enrolment scheme to manage their rolls. Enrolment schemes for these schools may not include a home zone or ballot. They will need to decide how they determine which students are considered local.
These services are licensed in accordance with the Education and Training Act 2020 under the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008, which prescribe minimum standards that each licensed service must meet. Licensing criteria are used to assess how the services meet the minimum standards required by the regulations.
These services can be privately owned, or owned and operated by a community group. Some are based within a workplace or university for staff and students to use for their children. There are also teen parent units where parents can attend school while their children go to an associated early learning service.
These services may require a different approach to funding so that continued viability of the service is ensured.
These services must develop a way to retain this information, how they do this is up to them as long as these records can be accessed.
These services should contact a health protection officer at their local public health unit or an environmental health officer at their local council for advice.
These services should contact their Ministry regional office for more information.
These sessions are separated into short and concise user activities.
These specific items may not be re-used without express permission.
These supports are planned to be available by May in time for mid-year reporting.
These terms of use apply to all of the Ministry of Education's social media accounts.
These terms of use will be reviewed every 12 months to ensure they are fit for purpose. They may be updated at any time without notice.
These totals are your Staff Hour Count.
These videos give an overview of preparing the annual financial statements and the audit process.
These will be, um, I will put these in the chat shortly, um,
They also provide a quality improvement cycle, self-review template and planning questions. These are intended to help early learning services plan for and review their use of Targeted Funding.
They are also an indicator of good management and administration practices necessary to ensure the safety of the children attending.
They are easy to replace.
They are future-focused, providing information about medium- and long-term trends, risks and opportunities, including analysis and policy options. They're also an opportunity to enhance public debate on long-term issues and contribute to future decision making.
They are identified by the compass symbol.
They are often referred to as co-ordinators or visiting teachers.
They are often set up in community halls. To be a playgroup, more than half the children attending must have a parent there with them. There is often a small charge to attend.
They are the difference between 30 hours of funding less the 20 Hours ECE Hours, and can be claimed up to six hours per day per child.
They can also be downloaded from the Education Review Office.
They can be used for other cleaning purposes.
They can count towards the requirement in HS25, where 1 adult must hold a current first aid qualification for every 25 children attending.
They can have a variety of different operating structures, philosophies and affiliations such as Montessori or Rudolf Steiner.
They can use this information to steal, sell, or destroy identities and important data.
They do not spread infections.
They ensure that it is clear when staff are responsible for children and when they can take lunch breaks or 'non-contact' planning time, etc. Draft schedules should be developed by newly established services to work out:
They include directions to other relevant parts of the handbook. Directions are usually found at the start of each chapter or section.
They must meet all applicable licensing criteria:
They must provide pastoral care and support to their exchange students. While EPOs cannot be signatories of the Education (Pastoral Care of International Students) Code of Practice 2021, they must meet the standards set out in the Code.
They need this information in case there is an outbreak of a vaccine-preventable disease at the early learning service. Children who are not immunised may be asked to stay at home if there is an outbreak.
They say that in bargaining, they will raise issues important to the ECE sector, taking a lead from the though it is likely to mean taking a stand on pay parity, non-contact time, ratios, professional development, and health and safety.
They should be able to confidently and knowledgeably describe how children (walking and non-walking) will be managed during an emergency drill.
They should be able to confidently identify the roles that they and others will play during an emergency drill.
They should be done at least every 6 months for all systems and applications. Your IT lead can decide the frequency of these reviews, depending on your school's needs.
They sign the contract with the supplier on behalf of the school.
They will be, um, they will be uploaded,
Things to consider include:
Think about how children can move freely without hurting each other. If children are climbing or sliding or jumping, make sure that there is enough cushioning on the floor for safe landing.
Think about how the furniture, equipment, and resources provided at your playgroup:
Think about information you already have on hand that you can use such as documented plans, photos, daily diaries, meeting minutes.
Think about the costs to run the playgroup. Some playgroups are run by
Think about the size, sturdiness and durability of items available to children, especially infants and toddlers.
Think about the space available in your building for nappy changing.
Think it definitely could fit in that, um, that Q code,
This Action Plan maps how we will achieve system change to better support Pacific learners and families in five key areas. This is critical to give life to the 30 year vision for all learners and families in Aotearoa, New Zealand and to the objectives of the Pacific Wellbeing Strategy and Pacific Languages Strategy.
This activity is more suitable for older children and should always be closely supervised.
This adjustment helps the cash flow model to calculate the cash paid by the school to the leasing company as a borrowing cost.
This allowance will be calculated at a pro-rata rate for part time certificated
This allowance will be calculated at a pro-rata rate for part time certificated teacher, based on the total number of hours they are employed for.
This allowance will be paid to services monthly in arrears following the receipt of a services application.
This also applies if we find issues of non-compliance that are not related to the reported incident or complaint we were investigating.
This appendix contains resources and examples referred to in this handbook.
This appendix contains the funding rate tables for different service types.
This appendix contains the salary scales for education and care services, including minimum salary scales from 1 January 2023 and updates that will be available from 1 November 2023.
This appendix lists the legal names of existing kindergarten associations that currently meet the definition of a kindergarten association in the Glossary.
This applies to adults living in a home where home-based education and care takes place.
This cabinet paper was translated into several languages, available on request.
This can include experience as a certificated teacher working for other immersion or bilingual services that does not use the same Pacific language.
This chapter contains the following topics:
This chapter explains how to ensure that funding continues when the need for flexibility arises.
This criterion aims to ensure adults and children are kept safe from harm.
This criterion aims to ensure children attending without a parent or caregiver are supervised and supported.
This criterion aims to ensure the safety of children in an emergency and also that adults have the necessary knowledge and supplies to deal with any emergency situation.
This criterion aims to keep children safe by ensuring that measures are in place to secure the outdoor environment.
This criterion aims to uphold the safety and wellbeing of children.
This criterion aims to uphold the wellbeing of children.
This criterion does not apply to
This criterion does not require that infants and toddlers are kept separated from older children.
This criterion does not require that infants and toddlers are kept separated from older children. Mixed-age settings and
This criterion is intended to ensure that there are hygienic handwashing, drying and toileting facilities for children.
This criterion is intended to ensure the safety of infants and toddlers and to support their exploration, development and learning.
This criterion is intended to make sure children can benefit from engaging in physically active play when no outdoor area is provided.
This criterion is intended to provide parents and caregivers with information about the operation of the playgroup.
This criterion makes more explicit the requirement to make some provision for children who need to sleep while attending the service but recognises that it is a rare occurrence.
This criterion makes sure the design and layout of the premises enables children to have access to a wide range of experiences.
This criterion makes sure what happens at playgroup is in line with the early childhood curriculum
This criterion recognises that:
This data informs robust, consistent decision-making so school property is always (at a minimum) warm, safe and dry for all schools across the motu.
This declaration is part of the enrolment agreement example and can be found in Appendix 2.
This describes the funding process for newly licensed services:
This directory currently covers quantity surveying services, master planning and lead design services. Over time, we will add further consultancy services.
This directory is for Ministry of Education-led projects, tendered by:
This document explains how to find your TDA.
This document explains how to get a UIP portal login and use the portal. It also covers how the EEL is calculated and what data you need to report to us.
This document outlines safety drills to teach to
This document sets out who you should contact.
This does not mean children must never be able to go into the centre kitchen. There are likely to be times when children will need to access kitchen and cooking facilities to take part in supervised activities such as cooking and food preparation.
This email and phone number are for news media enquiries only.
This evacuation procedure must cover all emergency situations including, but not limited to fire, earthquake, tsunami, flood, storm, volcano, landslide and so on. The procedure has a broader scope than just fire evacuation and must be consistent with the overarching Fire and Emergency NZ approved fire evacuation scheme.
This form does not notify Education Payroll. You will also need to also fill in the EdPay and NOVO forms to claim the bus controller allowance.
This form should be used to document the medical reasons behind an exemption from the absence rules. It must be completed by a registered medical practitioner.
This group is characterised by high levels of language endangerment, low numbers of speakers, low intergenerational transmission and strong constitutional ties to Aotearoa with specific constitutional obligations to revitalise these languages. The largest populations of these groups in the world are found in Aotearoa, often in concentrated communities.
This group is characterised by smaller, emerging populations of language speakers with some degree of formal relationship with New Zealand. There are smaller numbers of people from these communities who are New Zealand-born and varying levels of language endangerment.
This guidance should be read in conjunction with the guidance for the other criteria relating to sleep (Premises and facilities 19 to 22 (on this page) and Health and safety 8 to 10).
This guidance should be read in conjunction with the guidance for the other criteria relating to sleep in Premises and facilities 30 to 38 (on this page) and Health and safety 9 to 11.
This guide provides schools with information and resources to assess attendance patterns within their school and put in place appropriate policies and practices to improve student attendance.
This guide sets out the requirements your school needs to meet under the Vulnerable Children's Act.
This handbook contains 5 types of information.
This handbook contains a lot of information that is relevant for all service types. There are also some sections that are of interest to some services only.
This handbook has everything you need to know about early childhood funding including the ECE Funding Subsidy, 20 Hours.
This handbook has everything you need to know about early childhood funding, including the ECE Funding Subsidy, 20 Hours ECE funding, equity funding and the annual top-up for isolated services.
This handbook is designed to be a 'one-stop-shop' of everything you need to know about early childhood funding, including:
This handbook sets out the conditions for funding payments to playgroups.
This includes guidance for safety checking requirements at playgroups and Playcentres.
This includes hygienic food preparation, and making sure food is able to be eaten safely. An example is grating hard foods like apples and carrots. If you provide your child's lunch and snacks, you may be asked to follow these food safety rules.
This includes information on who to contact to have an international first aid qualification assessed to see if it meets requirements.
This includes looking at:
This includes meeting requirements for record keeping and reporting on the use of funding.
This includes who to contact to have an international first aid qualification assessed to see if it meets requirements.
This information allows the Ministry to ensure that the correct number of funded child hours have been claimed by the service.
This information does not apply to certificated playgroups. Instead, refer to the Playgroup funding handbook.
This information must be available at the service within 180 days of the end of the financial year.
This information will include:
This is a bar chart showing 80% of Year 8 students at or above the expected curriculum level for their age in reading, writing and maths by December 2030.
This is a criterion where health expertise can provide guidance on hygienic practices and the control of infection. Service providers are also reminded that under Regulation 55, the Ministry of Education may require a service provider to obtain a report from a public health unit in order to assess whether the facilities and procedures used at the centre are adequate to prevent the spread of infection.
This is a line chart showing the proportion of students present for more than 90% of the term. The target is 80%. It decreased to a percentage in the low 60s in 2017 and 2018, then increased to over 70% in 2018. In 2019, the percentage fell to below 60% and saw sharp increases and decreases around 60% until late 2021. In 2021-22, the percentage fell to 40%, and increased to 60% in 2022. It decreased again to under 50% in 2023, but had a
This is a national panel of suppliers for the delivery of capital works projects over $500,000.
This is a programme for parents of kids aged 3-8, which provides you with skills to better support your child.
This is a requirement for teacher-led centre-based services and all-day kindergartens only.
This is a requirement of the Children's Act 2014.
This is a requirement under the Education and Training Act.
This is a specialised sub-panel of the All-of-Government (AoG) construction consultancy services (CCS) panel. It is only available for Ministry-led projects.
This is an appropriate way to simplify your document as it is important you do not delete any rows. Before we start the session, it is important that you keep a copy of the model.
This is an estimate of new entrants likely to enrol before 10 October. The adjustment is added to the Year 1 roll to give an adjusted total.
This is our series of short instructional videos for using the Kiwi Park model.
This is outlined in section 582 of the Education and Training Act 2020.
This is public transport that:
This is required by the Education and Training Act 2020.
This is the Under 2s FCHs for the day.
This is the date from which the change of circumstances takes effect. For example, the date on which the service begins offering 20 Hours ECE, or the date on which the licensed maximum number of children increased.
This is the information you will provide to potential suppliers in your tender documents.
This is the largest review
This is the most common 2FA method. Using an app on your phone, you receive a 1-time code which you must enter within a set timeframe.
This is the section of your operation statement where you explain the purpose of your group and what you want it to achieve for children and their parents and caregivers. This will include the shared beliefs and values that are important to parents and caregivers in the playgroup. Every statement of philosophy will be different, but you might want to include:
This is the total number of 3-year-olds, 4-year-olds and 5- year-olds you estimate will receive 20 Hours ECE.
This is where a home educator looks after children in a private home. This could be their home, your home or another home. Home-based educators can have up to 4 children from birth to until they start school.
This keeps the financial records of the community group and the ECE service separate.
This limit is specified in the vehicle's Certificate of Loading. Transport service providers are responsible for ensuring that they don't exceed loading limits.
This list of providers does not include:
This makes it faster and easier for staff to log in securely.
This may include but is not limited to:
This may include when we are considering and investigating compliance breaches, complaints, and initiating our own investigations or inquiries. We take all steps that are reasonable to ensure that the information we provide to third parties is accurate.
This means that every licensed home-based service must have 1 person responsible, often called the coordinator or visiting teacher, for every 50 children attending at any one time. For services with 51 to 100 children attending there must be 2 persons responsible.
This measure is used for teacher-led centre-based services only.
This media release was translated into several languages, available on request.
This method of populating the financial statements is time consuming and can cause errors if you are not sure how the schools GL codes are mapped to the Ministry codes.
This might, for example, include an item on the record which states:
This must be submitted in February each year for the funding received for the previous calendar year. Details on how Targeted Funding was used must be provided at the individual service level and specify:
This needs to be completed:
This new section will mean different things for the different groups of people in our education system.
This pack provides information about the planning and reporting process for your community. It explains the role the community has in the process.
This page contains change of service provider (ownership) information for funding purposes.
This page outlines the eligibility conditions for the ECE Funding Subsidy.
This page will be regularly updated.
This payment is made up of the advance for July, August, September, October, and wash-up for February, March, April and May.
This payment is made up of the advance for March, April, May, June, and wash-up for October, November, December and January.
This payment is made up of the advance for November, December, January, February, and wash-up for June, July, August and September.
This policy should cover:
This poster sets out who needs to be checked before working at your school, and what steps that involves.
This presentation has guidance about engaging with schools and communities about proposed changes at school.
This principle recognises that children learn through interacting with the people, places and things in their environments. Playgroups can help with this by providing a wide and interesting array of people, places and things for children to interact with.
This principle recognises that children live and grow as members of families and communities and these groups influence their early learning experiences. Family and local community values and aspirations are incorporated into playgroup sessions by respecting differing viewpoints and fostering family and community involvement.
This privacy statement applies to your personal and other information collected through the Learner Identity Broker service.
This process is mandatory for procurements of $10,000 or more.
This proposed change to the Act would require school boards to have an Attendance Management Plan by Term 1 2026. The plan must set out a strategy and process for the school to identify and respond to student absences, with the purpose of returning students to school.
This requires the following steps.
This research was translated into several languages, available on request.
This right includes attending school all hours that the school is open for instruction. Students with special education needs have the same rights to education as other students.
This role is usually filled by a professional project manager.
This section contains ECE Funding Subsidy information for all services.
This section explains how services can calculate 20 Hours ECE Funding.
This section explains how services can calculate the ECE Funding Subsidy.
This section explains how you can transfer the Certificated and Other Teacher hour information from your Early Childhood Staff Record to your RS7 Return.
This section explains how you can use the Funding Rate Table to find the funding rate for each service and that services can access higher funding rates by meeting quality requirements.
This section explains the Three Week Rule, and how to apply it.
This section explains the criteria for exemption from the absence rules, and how services can apply for an exemption.
This section explains the financial payments services may and may not request from parents for the period children are enrolled for 20 Hours ECE.
This section explains what records ECE services must keep to support their funding claims.
This section illustrates how the Frequent Absence Rule can be applied in the three different situations outlined in the previous section.
This section is for new ECE services.
This section is for services beginning, or ceasing to offer 20 Hours ECE.
This section outlines the eligibility conditions for services eligible to provide 20 Hours ECE and children eligible to receive 20 Hours ECE.
This section outlines what kind of financial information a service should send to the Ministry and when to send it.
This section provides a brief overview of the link between licensing and funding.
This section provides information about the previous iteration of Tau Mai Te Reo (2013-2017). Tau Mai Te Reo has now been refreshed as part of the Education Work Programme.
This section sets out the circumstances where the Ministry may recover funding from services or service providers.
This section was removed April 2015
This section was removed in April 2015.
This section was removed in June 2016.
This service is for students who have been approved by us. It is free.
This service is provided for state schools only because the Ministry of Education is the owner of these sites. Private and state-integrated schools are free to directly engage the services of the ERCs themselves but the contracting arrangement would be between these parties.
This should also immediately be reported to your regional office.
This should at least include:
This should be developed in conjunction with parents so there is a shared understanding of what actions staff may take.
This should be set out in your school's cyber security policy.
This site is owned and maintained by the Ministry of Education.
This space is located and designed to:
This statement applies to information gathered by us, our contractors, or any third parties engaged by us.
This table can be found in the Appendix 1. This will be updated each time there is a change to the ECE Funding Subsidy rates.
This team should have at least 3 people and may include:
This template also should be updated to provide a current profile of the list of systems and permissions that are allocated to a staff member. This will make the offboarding process easier for the IT administrator.
This tile is on your homepage.
This toolkit includes worksheets that schools may use during the planning process.
This transparency statement explains how we collect, use, and share information gathered about individuals and organisations for the purposes of carrying out our statutory functions under the Education Act 1989.
This video will help employers and teachers decide which initial step on the salary scale the teacher should be on.
This was the present code, the late code,
This website and its contents are subject to copyright laws of New Zealand and, through international treaties, other countries.
This will be communicated, um, via the school bulletin, um,
This will ensure that funding claims are accepted by the Ministry in the event of a funding claim audit.
This will occur only when the service is filled to its maximum capacity and the casual child is directly replacing an absent child who is claiming 20 Hours ECE.
This will often involve you and your child making several visits before their official start date. The first visit will likely be short, with each subsequent visit being a bit longer. When the child is ready, you might be encouraged to leave them at the service for a time.
This year the Ministry of Education will work closely with schools to develop and implement attendance management plans.
Three Week Rule for Continuous Absence - 6-5
Three Week Rule for Continuous Absence: 6-5
Three Week Rule: extension for extended non-operation - 6-6
Three Week Rule: extension for extended non-operation: 6-6
Three eligibility criteria make sure school transport assistance is provided to the students who need it most.
Three of these scholarships are for school leavers to train as teachers.
Throughout this section there are examples of 2 services calculating their 20 Hours ECE funding.
Throughout this section there are examples of two services calculating their ECE Funding Subsidy.
Thursday 18 September 2025: Quarter 4 operational funding instalment published.
Thursday 19 June 2025: Quarter 3 operational funding instalment published in
Thursday 27 March 2025: Quarter 2 operational funding instalment and confirmed entitlement staffing published in
Thursday 3 July 2025: July roll return due.
Tick one of the boxes with the reason for the bank account change.
TikTok community guidelines
Time between exposure and sickness
Time taken to complete the emergency drill (for each separate group if appropriate).
Tip: Services can find an auditor or check whether their auditor is a CA ANZ member by visiting the Chartered Accountants of Australia and New Zealand website.
Tips and starters: working together
Tips are identified by the light bulb symbol.
Tips are identified by this block.
Tips for parents and caregivers on child safety (including hot water safety).
To access the School Data Portal, go to services.education.govt.nz, click on the Education Sector Logon,
To add an additional partner school to your approved exchange programme, use this form.
To answer this question respondents will choose one of 4 options:
To answer this question your service must choose one of 4 options:
To apply for a licence, choose the type of early learning service you are opening.
To apply the Frequent Absence Rule, you must check child attendance patterns at the end of each month.
To apply, fill out the application form that applies to your school. Your application must include a copy of your highest roll sorted by funding year level. Contact your student management system (SMS) provider if you need help to create this.
To apply, you must be the child's parent or legal guardian. All of your child's legal guardians need to be in agreement about home education.
To avoid any conflicts of interests, owners or operators of early learning services must use a third party to complete their own safety checks and checks of any person who is related or closely connected.
To be approved, you must meet requirement related to:
To be considered for transport assistance, your child must meet all 3 of the following criteria.
To be counted as participating in a hospital-based service a child must be admitted to the hospital, or be attending the hospital as an outpatient for visits following an admission and
To be eligible for SESTA, a child or young person must:
To be eligible for SESTA, your child must:
To be eligible for quality funding rates, licensed playcentres must meet 1 or more of the options below. Where 2 or more different types of training are required, these must be held by separate people.
To be entitled to the full amount of Targeted Funding, early learning services must not close or be suspended during the period that Targeted Funding is provided for.
To be helpful, the policy should contain definitions of neglect and abuse so that adults can apply these consistently when needed.
To be helpful, the policy should contain definitions of neglect and abuse so that staff can apply these consistently when needed.
To be licensed by us, all services must meet our standards for education and care, including health and safety, curriculum, premises and facilities, governance and management, and child protection.
To complete the eligibility assessment, the Ministry will extract child-level attendance data from ELI. Early learning services should ensure their ELI data is kept up-to-date. Failure to do so may affect their funding entitlement.
To comply with these standards, schools and
To confirm what minimum salary levels your service intends to meet, the Attestation for Certificated Teachers section asks:
To count as an adult for each service, a person must be at least 17 years old and have responsibilities other than food preparation, serving, administration, or maintenance.
To demonstrate compliance, your EC1 application (Application for a Centre-based Early Learning Service) must be accompanied by evidence of staff being employed or engaged and ready to commence work when the licence is issued.
To do this, we collect, use, and share personal information in line with the Privacy Act to carry out our role under the Education and Training Act.
To download the completion certificate, follow the steps below.
To employ teachers for your ECE service
To enable children to access the outdoors easily and safely, the outdoor activity space needs to be connected to the indoor activity space. Where the outdoor space is lower or higher than the indoor space, a ramp or steps can be used to provide access between the two.
To ensure that local students have access to our new school and to manage the roll effectively, we have developed a proposed enrolment scheme in consultation with the local network of schools. We are now seeking your feedback on this proposed scheme.
To fill in the application form, you will need lots of information about your child and their needs. You can find the details of what information you need by opening the online application form. You don't need to start an application to view this information.
To find out more about the options available in your area you will need to check with individual services. This is because not all services even within the same group operate in exactly the same way.
To find out the regulated (ratio) staff requirements for your service, please refer to the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008.
To find out when you will receive your first payment, please contact your Ministry regional office.
To find the course, log in with your Education Sector Logon (ESL) details, and search 'catalogue' for 'bus'.
To find this and future years term dates and half-day requirements, visit the following page.
To get a procurement plan approved:
To get in touch with your regional advisor, email us.
To get the contract signed:
To help services correctly apply this condition clause, operational guidelines are available.
To help us make sure that you receive the correct information, be as specific as you can in identifying the information you want.
To implement the least privilege, IT leads should check:
To increase regular attendance rates, the Government has set a target: by 2030, 80% of students are present for more than 90% of the term.
To join, a supplier needs to be a member of the AoG CCS panel.
To let us know about a change in your child's circumstances, contact us.
To make nappy changing space as safe, comfortable and hygienic for everyone as possible, consider the following:
To make paper towels more economical, half-sized paper towels are available that can be used with standard dispensers. You can reduce mess by teaching children to scrunch the paper towel into the smallest ball they can, before dropping it in the bin.
To meet this criterion in a way that is consistent with
To meet this criterion in a way that is consistent with the prescribed curriculum framework each early learning service should design its own culturally responsive, bi-cultural curriculum priorities using
To meet this criterion in a way that is consistent with the prescribed curriculum framework each licensed early learning service should design its own culturally responsive, bicultural curriculum priorities using
To meet this objective, a school board must meet a list of supporting objectives. These are generally the same as current objectives, apart from the changes below.
To notify us of a change of bus controller at your school, fill in the change of bus controller form.
To order, go to Down the Back of the Chair or email
To receive the Daily Bus Conveyance allowance your child must meet the 3 criteria for being eligible for transport assistance and have limited access to a school bus. This means either:
To reduce the risk of choking on these foods the educator can:
To reduce the risk of choking on these foods:
To request for learning support, you can:
To request support for your child, phone or email your regional office.
To start a certified playgroup or
To start an early learning service, you need to know what type of service you want to open and if you need to apply for a licence.
To support the refresh of
To track our progress towards improving achievement, the Government has set a target: by December 2030, 80% of Year 8 students are at or above the expected curriculum level for their age in reading, writing and maths.
To ungroup the sheets, right mouse click on the bottom of the worksheet and select Ungroup Sheets.
Toddlers explore in different ways they are energetic and on the move. Often their desires are ahead of their language and their physical abilities.
Toddlers: about 1 to 3 years old
Toilet and handwashing facilities
Toilet and handwashing facilities at early learning services
Toilets and handwashing areas have spaces to give children some privacy when they need it, while also making sure they are safe.
Toilets for adults need to be full-sized, and able to be made private when being used.
Toilets, washing and nappy changing
Total Certificated Teacher Hours + Other Teacher Hours for the 4-month period (rounded)
Total Certificated Teacher Hours for the 4-month period (rounded)
Total Hours worked during the ECE Census week.
Total amount of Targeted Funding received.
Total hours claimed per day
Total hours enrolled per week
Total the daily 20 Hours ECE hours for all children.
Total these by day for all children. This is the total hours that can be claimed.
Toys and equipment selected for use in playgroups should be:
Tracey Mouat (Palmerston North)
Traditionally in New Zealand, children have started school on or shortly after their fifth birthday. Many still do, but now some schools are using cohort entry with students starting in groups.
Traffic management and car parks
Training as part of new staff and volunteer induction.
Training as part of new staff induction.
Training could be provided by any of:
Training could be provided via a conversation/demonstration/written information by any of:
Training for school leaders and administration staff
Transferring eligibility to another school
Transforming how our children learn to read
Transition attendance plan template
Transitional school visits
Transitional school visits funding rule
Transitional school visits: 7-8
Transparency statement about information gathering for regulatory compliance purposes
Transparency statement: Information gathering for regulatory compliance
Transport Delivery Advisor contact details by location
Transport Delivery Advisor contact information
Transport assistance for children with safety or mobility needs
Transport assistance is not available if you have public transport in your area. This is public transport that:
Transport between home and an alternate address is your responsibility.
Transport for early learning services
Transport providers can only take ineligible students if it does not disadvantage an eligible student and they have a seat on the bus for everyone. It also must not require the contracted route to change.
Transport providers must make sure their staff and vehicles meet legal requirements.
Transport service providers decide where the bus will stop along the way.
Tuesday 1 April 2025: Quarter 2 operational funding instalment paid.
Tuesday 1 July 2025: Quarter 3 operational funding instalment paid.
Tuesday 18 March 2025: Banking staffing balancing period ends.
Tuesday 21 January 2025: End of banking staffing Year PP 202522 - funding code change requests to Education Payroll.
Two new rapid payment options
Two-factor authentication (2FA) adds an extra level of security to your school accounts. It should be required for specific roles and accounts at schools or kura.
Two-factor authentication (2FA) adds an extra verification step to access an account or network.
Type of service that must provide this information
Types of assistance available
Types of early learning services
Types of information in the ECE funding handbook JPG
Types of primary and secondary education
Types of school exchanges
Typically, a SMS provides more functionality than ELI Web. ELI Web is a free-of-charge Ministry application designed to collect the required data from licensed early childhood services that do not use a SMS.
Uh, I remember my school policy was five days,
Uh, is it a, is it a form of illness and medical absence?
Uh, rural schools, when students go with whanau
Uh, should we move to mark the role at the end
Uh, what we have done here is we've made a deliberate, uh,
Uh, you should be able to record time left.
Um, I am going to stop sharing the presentation so I can,
Um, I can, I can fully answer that.
Um, I do see that everyone's mic is turned off.
Um, I don't expect people to enjoy a well-deserved holiday,
Um, I suspect a number of,
Um, I think it's school policy,
Um, I think that's changing
Um, I think this is where we, um, take us as sort
Um, I think you answered that,
Um, I will have that written down for the next time.
Um, I'm Tina Lech, uh, based here in ua,
Um, I'm senior advisor here at the Ministry,
Um, Rebecca, just while we've got you, um,
Um, after the presentation, when we get
Um, all ch all required changes will be made in time
Um, and a, uh, into the guidelines where possible,
Um, and also, um, will likely be useful
Um, and as I said, we also left the holiday
Um, and as far as I'm aware, um,
Um, and before we kick off, just a few housekeeping things
Um, and further supporting the guidelines, there will be
Um, and if there have, there have only the there've, uh,
Um, and so if you've got any questions concerning that, um,
Um, and so there could be some guidance coming, uh, midway
Um, and so we did have, um, a number of school, uh,
Um, and so, but there will be further guidance
Um, and then I will put up a, actually
Um, and then just to follow up with
Um, and then we will launch a presentation and kick into it.
Um, and they do have the opportunity
Um, and when we are having conversations with our whanau
Um, and you could have that conversation then,
Um, and you're also more than welcome to interact, um,
Um, and you're welcome to get through to me.
Um, as I said previously,
Um, but I see what Tanya's put in the, the chat.
Um, but for the most part, the, um, what I can share is
Um, but most importantly provide you with an opportunity
Um, but one thing we also have is,
Um, but that was never their intended purpose.
Um, but the X code is for your N-C-A-N-C-Q-A exams.
Um, but the, the question marks the unknown temporary code,
Um, but through strong sector feedback, they told us
Um, but we are marking half day attendance, so I would say
Um, but we will be providing some guidance in the,
Um, but we, uh, one thing, uh, we had a variety of
Um, but what this is, is it's outlining
Um, but when they're representing their region,
Um, but with that said, in terms of what's changing, um,
Um, but yeah, individual school is,
Um, but yeah, it, the second half
Um, but yeah, like we said, we'll put, we, uh,
Um, but yeah, you will do expect to see a change, um,
Um, but, so it'll kind of be by the end of the day.
Um, but, um, I'm not sure if anyone else wanted
Um, but, you know, as, um, unique examples
Um, couple, couple of different
Um, down here in Bluff, um, majority of our Tam Titi,
Um, has that been rolled into a code mark?
Um, have called for the need for a simplified set
Um, however, my understanding is that the majority do.
Um, if there's anything, um, that relates
Um, if you can't get a hold of them, I, um,
Um, if you do have any further questions, um,
Um, if you, and you can start to jot this down at any time.
Um, in national office, this was something
Um, it could be that they are going
Um, it does report that now.
Um, it would be the practice of the school.
Um, it's an e Um, I would be having conversations
Um, mark and Jared, will there be guidance come
Um, not just culturally, but historically.
Um, otherwise, yeah, definitely I'm very keen
Um, so as we work through the guidance, uh,
Um, so do please periodically check back, um,
Um, so if they're representing the school, um,
Um, so if you've got any questions that relate
Um, so it's a, it's a really good question.
Um, so our birthday is not an acceptable reason to be,
Um, so that's at the moment, not not a ministry area,
Um, so we are working with SMS, um, all
Um, so you could keep that as present
Um, so you should be able to write a note, um, in that
Um, so, so I think this is where
Um, that has always been a legislative provision.
Um, that was previously approved off site learning.
Um, the other thing is that there are, um, transition plans.
Um, then the school policies are J and e, um,
Um, there are some flowing effects of doing that,
Um, there has been some work going on
Um, there have been previous attempts at this,
Um, there is a section on the attendance codes.
Um, there is a website that's being created, um,
Um, they, the way that it's reported is different.
Um, we did discuss it, um,
Um, we haven't touched the holiday during term time,
Um, we were considering, um, collapsing that.
Um, we will have the opportunities
Um, we've also got explained and approved,
Um, we, we definitely have listened.
Um, what were some of the things we heard when engaging
Um, with that said, the, another thing
Um, yeah, so that was, uh,
Um, yeah, so they would be, depending on
Um, yeah. So we'll have to have this conversation
Um, you please enter in, um,
Um, you've got the, essentially the absence codes,
Umbrella organisation carrying out safety checks
Umbrella organisations carrying out safety checks
Unacceptable home-based educator top up payments
Unacceptable optional charges
Under 2s will remain unchanged.
Under New Zealand law, children under 7 years old must use an approved child restraint suitable for their age and size. If a child is 7 years old, they must be secured in a restraint if available in the vehicle.
Under Section 39(3) of the Children's Act 2014, service providers are required to be able to provide details on any safety check done on a person and their work history including:
Under The Food Act (2014), education and care services including playgroups that undertake minimal food handling (for example where very limited food is provided (cut fruit, biscuits and so on) and where children bring their own lunchboxes) are only subject to the basic requirement to ensure food is safe and suitable.
Under section 134 of the Education and Training Act 2020, all school and kura boards must prepare financial statements as part of their annual report.
Under section 237A (Attendance records) of the Education and Training Act 2020, the Secretary for Education has published rules setting out administrative and procedural requirements relating to attendance records. These rules are published in the New Zealand Gazette.
Under section 589 of the Act, unions are currently required to provide 3 days' notice before starting a proposed school strike.
Under the Children's Act 2014 and the Education and Training Act 2020, Police vets must be done for:
Under the Children's Act 2014, the requirements apply to unpaid work that is undertaken as part of an educational or vocational training course (for example a student teacher undertaking and practicum placement).
Under the Education and Training Act 2020 and the Education (School Planning and Reporting) Regulations 2023 a new planning and reporting framework is in place.
Under the Family Violence Act, you are required to consider sharing information if it may help protect a victim from family violence, or if we receive a request for information.
Under the Food Act (2014), home-based educators who prepare and serve food for the children in their care must ensure the food they provide is safe and suitable.
Under the Food Act 2014 and Food Regulations 2015, if you provide food as part of your ECE service it must be safe and suitable. Depending on what kind of food you provide, you may need to register and operate under a National Programme Level 2.
Under the Food Act 2014 there are no specific food safety training requirements for early childhood education staff.
Under the Health and Safety at Work Act 2015, ECE services must notify WorkSafe New Zealand if there is a notifiable event. Services should ensure that their health and safety practices are aligned to their obligations under other legislation.
Under the Health and Safety at Work Act 2015, service providers must notify WorkSafe New Zealand if there is a notifiable event. Services should ensure that their health and safety practices are aligned to their obligations under other legislation.
Under the STAR framework, any student who reaches a clearly defined threshold of days absent will trigger an appropriate and proportionate response from their school and the Ministry.
Under the agreement, information can be shared when:
Under the previous legislative framework, Boards were responsible for the development and consultation on the creation or modification of enrolment schemes. This was a significant and time-consuming obligation on Board members, many of whom are effectively volunteers.
Undercooked food, contaminated water. Direct spread from an infected person or animal
Understand the components that make up your entitlement staffing and how they are calculated.
Understand what transport assistance might be available and who is eligible for it.
Understand what your child is learning at school or kura, how they are progressing against the curriculum, and what you can do to support them at home.
Understand your child's learning
Understanding access based on role
Understanding and minimising the use of physical restraint
Understanding compliance levels
Union members are entitled to attend at least 2 paid union meetings per year.
Unique Identifier use in the PBRF or other research initiatives
Unit I, 16 Bishop Dunn Place
Unit standards for first aid qualifications
Units are for teachers and may not be paid to principals.
Units are not part of the banking staffing arrangements.
Units are paid fortnightly as part of the teacher's salary.
Units cannot be divided except for official job share positions as described in the teachers' collective agreement.
Units may be available to a teacher who is an assistant or deputy principal and does principal duties at times.
Universities New Zealand has information on scholarships for study in New Zealand's universities or overseas.
Unless a court order rules otherwise, all parents and guardians are entitled to:
Unless otherwise indicated, the material on our social media accounts is protected by Crown copyright. You can reproduce this Crown copyright material free of charge without further permission, as long as you:
Unnecessary unless unwell
Unsuccessful respondent letter template
Until sores have dried up or 24 hours after antibiotic treatment has started
Until well and for 48 hours after the last episode of diarrhoea or vomiting
Until well and for 7 days from appearance of rash
Until well enough to return
Unused curriculum half-days
Up to 20 hours per week may be claimed as 20 Hours ECE for eligible children for whom a parent/caregiver has provided a signed attestation. Remaining hours up to the 30
Up to 40% of units may be allocated as fixed term.
Up-to-date child enrolment and attendance information.
Updates to 5-year implementation timeline
Updates to social media terms of use
Updating previously submitted data
Upload the Kiwi Park model (optional)
Upload the annual report as 1 PDF
Upon arrival, take the lift to Level 2. A member of our team will be downstairs to welcome and guide you in.
Use a calendar to count up the number of days the service will be open and operating as all-day during each of the next 4 months.
Use a calendar to count up the number of days the service will be open and operating as sessional during each of the next 4 months.
Use a calendar to count up the number of days your service will be open and operating during the next five months.
Use a modern hash function and salt to prevent rainbow table attacks.
Use a single-stage or 2-stage open tender
Use adequate soap or detergent.
Use hand basins or a trough. If the height of hand basins or a trough is between 550 and 600mm from the floor for older children, and 450 to 500mm from the floor for young children, they are likely to be easily reached. (If children need to use steps, the bathroom area will have unnecessary clutter and hazards.) Consider the age range of children who will attend.
Use of National Student Numbers
Use of computers, iPads etc
Use of information collected
Use of social media by Ministry staff
Use our attendance service application to make a referral.
Use our websites without using data
Use strong, unique passwords for every account at your school or kura.
Use taps that turn themselves off, with a very easy lever for children to operate. Taps of this type prevent water from being left on and are available from most plumbing outlets.
Use taps that turn themselves off, with a very easy lever for children to operate. Taps of this type prevent water from being left on.
Use the checklists to help you prepare for the review. The checklists cover what documents you need to submit, depending on which design stage the review is for.
Use the correct quote request template for your project.
Use the evaluation process in the procurement plan to score each compliant offer.
Use the example schedule below as a guide and carry out the following steps.
Use the information below to find out if you can fill extra child-places with conditionally enrolled children:
Use the information below to see where you can find copies of the documents referred to in this section.
Use the key below to understand the shading and letters used in the example:
Use the key below to understand the shading and letters used in the examples:
Use the steps below to calculate your 20 Hours ECE funding.
Use the table above to find out when the wash-up payment for February, June or October will be paid.
Use the table to find out the funding rate per funded child hour (FCH) for your service.
Use the unique reference number that you received in your text, email or posted letter from us, to access the portal. You will be asked a set of questions to prove your identity. You will then be able to see the remediation payment amount. If you do not wish to claim your payment, there is a box to tick to confirm you are choosing not to proceed with the claim.
Use these templates to plan debriefing sessions and to notify unsuccessful suppliers.
Use this information to start documenting the procurement requirements.
Use this method by giving permission with organisational units (OU) and groups in Google Workspace and groups in Microsoft.
Use this process for school-led property projects that need construction or consultancy services.
Use this template to record the information and keep it on file.
Use this to find out if your service should provide general purpose financial statements or a special purpose financial report:
Using 2-factor authentication
Using 2-factor authentication at school
Using 20 hours ECE at more than 1 service
Using a password manager application
Using child-sized toilets prevents the need for a step. This may make them safer to use (minimises hazards) and encourages children to toilet because it is much easier for them.
Using one or more buckets to wash materials and disposing of the wastewater in the laundry sink or down an outside gully trap.
Using these tips in optional.
Using these tips is optional.
Using weak passwords across different accounts can make it easy for a cyber criminal to access personal information about your staff or students, like:
Usually, you will stay with your child and take part in the session, but sometimes you can drop older children off for some sessions.
Usually, your midwife will help you sign up with
Vaccine-preventable and/or on the National Immunisation Schedule
Vehicles used for school transport must comply with
Ventilation in early learning
Ventilation in early learning services
Verified by: Wanda Maximoff
Verify your bank account details.
Very low fences may need to be replaced to ensure children cannot leave unnoticed.
Very young children need a safe, warm place (rug, carpet square or cushions) to play away from the main play area but where they can still see and be seen.
Video 1 - Introduction Ministry of Education
Video 2 - Office of The Auditor General (OAG)
Video 3 - School Audit Process - Deloitte
Video 5 - Guidance on Key Areas - Ministry of Education
Video summarising pay parity in education and care service (including hospital-based).
View all news and updates
View all public consultations
View school transport assistance information
View the Ministry's list of basic equipment.
Viewing and correcting of personal information
Vijay has attended for fewer than five days a week in more than half of the weeks in February.
Vijay is enrolled to attend an early childhood centre for 5 days a week.
Vinyl that is coved and extends a little way up the wall is easier to clean and is more hygienic over long periods of time because it eliminates joins at the edge of the floor. Different territorial authorities may have requirements to have vinyl in the toilet and kitchen areas (wet areas) extending 75mm up the wall. Check the requirements of your local authority.
Visit Down the Back of the Chair to order more copies:
Visit Education Workforce
Visit Health and safety in early learning
Visit the Sport New Zealand website for more ideas.
Vocational Education and Training (VET) redesign
Voluntary Service Abroad - providing service was in a teaching position while the teacher held a teaching certificate.
Volunteers do not need to be Police vetted by law, but child safety should always be paramount. If you are not sure whether vetting is needed, it is better to be safe and do a Police vet.
Volunteers do not need to be Police vetted under the Children's Act 2014 or the Education and Training Act 2020.
Volunteers who will have contact with children may include:
Vulnerable Children Act 2014
WSP (24 hours, 7 days a week)
Waikato Kindergarten Association
Waimate Free Kindergarten Association Incorporated
Waimokoia/Mt Wellington Residential School
Waiting time for 1-year-olds.
Waiting time for 2-year-olds.
Waiting time for 3-year-olds.
Waiting time for 4-year-olds.
Waiting time for under 1-year-olds
Warning: to avoid overpayment of funding
Wash children and wipe noses with disposable wipes or cloths that are used only once.
Wash-up funding may be a positive (e.g. $2,000.00) or negative (e.g. -$2,000.00) amount. If it is negative, the Ministry deducts the amount from future payments.
Washing practices should be consistent with the requirements of PF18 Body wash facilities.
Washing practices should be consistent with the requirements of PF26 Body wash facilities.
Water temperature is one of the most common hazards educators will need to manage in the home setting. An educator should never let a child come in contact with water until it has been checked by hand.
We acknowledged that, uh, you know, with the requirement
We aim to acknowledge your complaint within 5 working days.
We also recognise that there are other Pacific languages and communities in Aotearoa. We will work with the Ministry for Pacific Peoples to identify opportunities to support these communities in education settings.
We also recommend that staff complete unit 6400, which will teach staff how to manage first aid in emergency situations.
We also spoke to, um, 11 Kura affiliated
We also want to acknowledge the significant role that families and communities play in supporting their children and young people. We value and thank them for the contributions they make every day.
We are also researching McKenzie Residential School and Campbell Park School. Once our research about these schools is finished, people who attended one of these schools will also be able to choose a rapid payment.
We are also updating our legislative and regulatory frameworks to give effect to the key ideas of Ka Hikitia and Tau Mai Te Reo.
We are continuing some actions from the 2020 Action Plan for Pacific Education. We are starting some new actions and have committed to some more new actions too.
We are currently refining the way we collect condition data.
We are descendants of explorers, discoverers and innovators who used their knowledge to traverse distant horizons. Our learning will be inclusive, equitable and connected so we progress and achieve advances for our people and their future journeys and encounters.
We are happy to answer any questions you have about your records.
We are now refining the scope of the topic based on consultation feedback and developing the content for the briefing.
We are pleased to share information regarding a proposed enrolment scheme for Te Kura Rau Iti, a new contributing primary school planned to open in Term 1 2026, at 121 Murphys Road, Flat Bush, Auckland.
We are pleased to share the refresh of the Action Plan for Pacific Education for 2023.
We are realistic that services providers are unlikely able to provide a lot of documentation to demonstrate full compliance with these criteria right now. Over time we will be expecting more, which will be indicated in discussions between advisors and service providers.
We are required to have a child protection policy under The Children's Act 2014.
We are responsible for licensing services and making sure services comply with regulated standards. We have the statutory powers, or legal authority, to intervene when services breach regulated standards. This legal authority allows us to:
We are seeking feedback from the community to help shape the final RSE content, which will be included in the refreshed health and physical education learning area, planned to be gazetted and available for use in 2026 and required for use from 2027.
We are working through that guidance at the moment.
We assess your application based on the needs of your child. If your child is eligible, they are not guaranteed a place in a vehicle as we will not always have a suitable service available. In this circumstance, you can get the SESTA Conveyance Allowance.
We audit roll returns to make sure schools receive the correct funding and staffing.
We bought the furniture and equipment for $12,345 and over the years we depreciated the furniture and equipment by $9,088. The net book value of the furniture and equipment at the time of disposal was $3,257.
We bought the vehicle for $25,000 and over the years we depreciated the vehicle by $21,000. The net book value of the vehicle at the time of disposal was $4,000 and we sold it for $5,000 cash, GST exclusive. This resulted in a gain of $1,000 to the school.
We can assist you if your child can't travel to school independently. Find out what we can do and how to apply for support.
We can direct a school with an enrolment scheme to enrol a student if:
We can provide practical support and help with things while you are waiting for your claim to be processed.
We cannot consider claims about private schools. You will need to discuss this with the governing body of the school in the first instance.
We collect information in a number of different ways. Examples include:
We collect, use, and share personal information in different ways depending on what we are doing or the service we are providing.
We commenced targeted stakeholder consultation on Friday 30 August on a government proposal to make changes to the way standard setting and approvals of Initial Teacher Education are undertaken.
We completed payments to current Ministry employees in October 2022 and started payments to former employees. Around 7,000 former employees are entitled to a payment, with about a third being under $100.
We consulted on a draft NELP in the Shaping a Stronger Education System with New Zealanders discussion document in late 2019, which was shaped by what New Zealanders had told us so far about what was important to them for education.
We contract providers across the country to deliver this service.
We currently have a number of claims waiting to be assessed. We generally try to assess older claims first, so there is some wait for an assessment.
We design our bus network to collect as many eligible children as possible. Each route needs to serve a minimum number of eligible children before it will be considered. We may alter services and routes as locations of students change.
We did. Um, you definitely, uh,
We didn't feel that that descriptor, um, was as clear
We do have, um, a question from Donna in the chat.
We do not accept claims on behalf of individuals who are deceased.
We do regular audits of our transport service providers. Bus drivers are trained and undergo background checks. They must follow a code of conduct and have guidelines for what to do if there is an incident.
We do this for a number of reasons including maintaining contact with what social media users are saying, sharing content or sending direct messages.
We don't take sides. We stay connected with people and groups who might not agree with us. However, we aren't responsible for the content they post.
We encourage school leaders to share their views to help shape expectations and refine the tools needed to lift attendance.
We encourage schools to align term dates with other local schools where possible. If your family is impacted by variation in term dates between local schools, you can talk to your principal.
We felt that that wasnt a, um, upon revision.
We fund local transport providers in most parts of the country to drive eligible children between home and their school.
We fund school bus services for getting students to school or
We had a number of people saying to us, look,
We had a number of primary scores that said, mark, we, we,
We have a Memorandum of Understanding with the Teaching Council, which sets out how we share information with each other.
We have a child protection policy that encourages a culture of child protection.
We have a target of all schools providing quality learning environments by 2030 to enable
We have a, a question from Tanya in the chat.
We have also completed some of the actions in the 2020 Action Plan for Pacific Education.
We have an information sheet you can share with families.
We have approved CV Check NZ to do safety checks on children's workers.
We have completed a privacy impact assessment in consultation with the Office of the Privacy Commissioner. There are 2 versions of the assessment.
We have contracted attendance service providers in all parts of the country. Attendance services work with schools and families to help get students back to school.
We have designed an information kit for boards,
We have developed guidance to help you. You may also consider using the development maps to help assess the progress you have made as a
We have divided the network of schools into 119 catchments across the country, each with its own growth profile. We use the latest school-aged population projections from Statistics New Zealand to forecast demand in each catchment.
We have done this to make the job of producing the financial statements easier.
We have guidance for developing a complaints policy and process, and how to handle complaints.
We have guidance on setting up 2FA across your school.
We have processes in place to give our students consistent, high-quality education at all levels.
We have put together a list of supporting resources. These will be updated as new resources become available.
We have received some great early feedback from schools participating in the maths PLD, which is designed to deepen your understanding of the updated maths learning area and support effective classroom practice.
We have students who, um, have to go home due
We highly recommend you use our contracts when agreeing to a purchase.
We hope you find these videos helpful. We are always happy to hear from you and welcome you feedback in these videos. Please contact your regional finance advisor to provide your feedback or suggestions on other videos that may be helpful.
We hope you find these videos helpful. We are always happy to hear from you and welcome you feedback. Please contact your regional finance advisor to provide your feedback or suggestions on other videos that may be helpful.
We hope you find these videos helpful. We are always happy to hear from you and welcome your feedback.
We include your school's data on Education Counts as part of the national daily attendance figure. The published data does not identify individual schools. You can request your school's data from your regional office or direct from your SMS.
We investigate any reported complaints or incidents to make sure early learning services are meeting regulatory requirements.
We invite suppliers in the directory to tender for these projects in the first instance.
We invite you to connect with us on:
We know that school leadership, board stewardship, quality teaching, and educationally powerful connections will influence positive school attendance.
We know there are other schools and
We love hearing your thoughts and ideas. But we might not be able to respond to every comment, post or direct message.
We manage and plan the network and make schooling changes to make sure that students have access to appropriate education pathways. Changes could include:
We manage and plan the schooling network across the country.
We manage school networks nationwide using a range of data including:
We may also ask your service to investigate an incident or complaint and report your findings to us.
We may also assist schools to conduct a performance review of their project manager. When we do this, we involve the project manager in the process and ask for their feedback.
We may also contribute to the cost of specialist equipment. This is equipment your child needs to stay safe and comfortable while they travel in a SESTA vehicle.
We may ask you for more details.
We may collect your information from other sources, instead of directly from you. This could include collecting
We may consider applications made at different times of the year under extreme circumstances. Applications close 2 weeks before every school holidays.
We may extend a bus route if it will serve more eligible students. This is subject to certain criteria, so schools should first contact their local Transport Delivery Advisor (TDA) to discuss a request to change bus routes.
We may extend the maximum number of days for transferring a request or making a decision and communicating it to you for the following reasons:
We may issue a written direction. Your licence may be reclassified to provisional or suspended during an investigation. This depends on the health and safety risk to children.
We may need to recover funding if your service moves to a lower funded salary scale.
We may operate other social media channels for a specific purpose or audience at different times.
We may report, block, or ban anyone who posts the above content or comments, or who breaches the terms of use of the relevant social media platform:
We may review your policies, procedures and records to make sure your service has complied with regulatory requirements.
We may share information where necessary to carry out our statutory functions. Information is shared in accordance with relevant statutory powers and in compliance with relevant legal obligations and any information sharing agreements, memoranda of understanding, and our own internal policies.
We may stop running school buses in an area if a public transport option becomes available. We will give affected schools or
We may visit your early learning service to inspect the premises, observe teaching and ask staff for information. This is permitted under section 626 of the Education and Training Act 2020.
We may, for example, share information with:
We meet regularly with ERO to discuss any issues as they arise and to review our agreed ways of working.
We might want to refer the issues you have raised with us to the Police ourselves, particularly if we are concerned that there could be a current risk to the safety of children. We will discuss this with you if we would like to do this.
We monitor contractual and legislative safety requirements of transport service providers (TSPs). This means we regularly contact TSPs and schools to discuss operational or safety concerns.
We monitor residential developments to understand location, scale and phasing so we can project how many students might move into an area. We also consider house sales data, property prices, transport links and a range of other factors in our planning.
We need to provide opportunities for those children and those families that would thrive under a bilingual and immersion system
We need to work with column Q R and S. In our example, a motor vehicle has been sold for $5000 and some furniture and equipment has been disposed for nothing. That is, no cash was paid to the school.
We neither confirm nor deny that the information exists: sections
We offer a range of support to
We often get requests about important public issues. To promote openness and accountability, we publish selected responses to these requests.
We only share personal information where the Privacy Act allows us to. Who we share information with includes:
We pay an annual allowance to
We pay the conveyance allowance to parents once per term. How much we pay depends on how many children they are taking to school and how far they have to travel. The allowance is paid at a daily rate so the payment will vary depending on how many school days are in the term.
We provide a school bus conveyance allowance when there is no school bus available, or an eligible student lives more than 2.4km from the nearest bus route. It is paid to parents or
We provide a transport service to help children and young people with safety and/or mobility needs get to school. When a child or young person qualifies for SESTA, we either provide a place in a vehicle or a payment to contribute to their travel costs.
We provide assistance when distance or a lack of public transport is a barrier to students attending their closest school.
We provide detailed guides to roles and responsibilities for each of our different service types:
We provide funding for every
We provide funding for specialised equipment if a student needs it to travel safely to and from school. Schools can help caregivers to apply. This is separate to the SESTA application.
We provide nutritious lunches, every school day, to the 25% of students who are in need of the greatest support.
We publish information online on a regular basis. Check whether the information you are looking for has already been released on our website.
We publish the full list of services who have opted in to the pay parity scheme on Education Counts. We update the list each funding period with the minimum salary scale each service has attested to paying their certificated teachers on.
We recommend having at least 2 super administrator or global administrator accounts but less than 4. This ensures support if an administrator is sick or on leave.
We recommend putting staff into different groups (organisational units) based on what permissions and access they need. For example:
We recommend putting staff into different groups or OU based on what permissions and access they need. If someone needs a slightly different permission set, put them in a new group or give the individual the extra access they need rather than giving the whole group the additional access. Regularly check to see if they still need the additional access.
We recommend teaching your child the skills that they would normally learn at school. If they were to go to school at any stage, this would make the transition easier.
We recommend that boards use our contracted emergency response coordinators when needed and that these contacts be readily available for use in the case of an emergency.
We recommend using a password manager. A password manager is like a digital notebook inside a vault for all your passwords. Password managers can:
We regularly review our systems to make sure that they have appropriate security safety safeguards in place to protect personal information.
We regularly update the directory to encourage new suppliers to join and existing suppliers to amend their appointment. We aim to release an open 'notice of intent' on the Government Electronic Tenders Service (GETS) before any update.
We reserve the right to remove any comments that may compromise our political neutrality.
We reserve the right to remove content posted to our social media accounts that:
We review designs for new schools and significant redevelopments as part of our quality assurance process.
We review the rates each year to account for changes in transport costs. We use
We run an online training session in managing attendance. Email our training services team for an invite to the training:
We run regular consultations about network changes.
We set a range of funding rates depending on:
We share responses that provide significant information and are of public interest. Personal details of requesters are removed.
We take all steps that are reasonable to ensure that the information we collect or receive from third parties is accurate.
We take care to exercise our information gathering powers lawfully and appropriately, and to meet our legal obligations including those in the Privacy Act 2020. We also take care to fulfil our obligations under the State Sector Code of Conduct and Information Gathering Model Standards, and to follow the Ministry of Education Code of Conduct at all times.
We take our obligations under the Official Information Act 1982 seriously. That includes responding to requests for official information via media queries.
We took that start of the 10,
We try to resolve any formal complaint within 15 working days. If your complaint is complex, this may take longer. If so, we will tell you and regularly update you on progress.
We understand lodging a claim can be distressing. We can pay for up to 6 counselling sessions while your claim is being processed.
We use cookies for the purpose of monitoring website use. A cookie is a piece of code that creates a file on your computer to track the pages that you view on our websites. Cookies from the Ministry website do not collect any personally identifiable information.
We use roll return data for:
We use social media to provide our followers with regular updates, including:
We use social media to share information about education in New Zealand, enable conversations and feedback and to be responsive to the views and needs of New Zealanders.
We use the 1 July roll and add a new entrant adjustment.
We use the 1 March roll and add a new entrant adjustment.
We use the 1 September roll.
We use the Equity Index to work out which schools and kura can join the Healthy School Lunches programme.
We use the Equity Index to work out which schools we need to include to reach these students. The Equity Index is a tool we use to work out which schools may need extra funding and resources.
We use the provisional roll including a new entrant adjustment.
We use the provisional roll.
We use your school roll for each year level to work out the components of your entitlement staffing. Read how we calculate:
We usually contact a service before a visit.
We want all children to achieve their potential no matter where they are.
We welcome different abilities, religious beliefs, ethnic groups, income levels and ideas about teaching and learning.
We will accommodate any special requests or needs you have, where appropriate.
We will appoint an assessor to assess your claim. The assessor is external to the Ministry.
We will ask the service and teacher to share information about themselves to the council by a certain date. If they do not do this, we will share the required information with the council.
We will audit your service to check that you are meeting these requirements.
We will be respectful of your culture and values.
We will consider prioritising the assessment of a claim in special circumstances.
We will consult on the draft briefing in early 2025 and the details will be added to this page.
We will contact you to let you know of the investigation outcome.
We will contact you with our response to your claim. This might include a telephone discussion and a letter to you. If you have a lawyer, we will write to them.
We will contact you within 5 working days of receiving your complaint to talk about how we will manage it.
We will demonstrate processes around trial balances, financial statements, submitting your annual report, and some tips on how to work efficiently with the model.
We will email you confirmation of the payment.
We will help you find a suitable school or
We will hold your allowance details for 12 months. If your child returns to boarding within that time, we will start your allowance again. If they return after the 12 months, you have to re-apply.
We will include the reasons for the decision and the actions we propose to take.
We will inform you of the reason for the refusal and of your right to ask the Ombudsman to investigate the refusal if you are not satisfied with the response.
We will invite you to meet with the assessor to talk about your experiences and discuss what you would like from the process. We can arrange for this meeting to take place at a location, date and time that is convenient to you. You are welcome to bring
We will make and communicate a decision on your request as soon as we can. This will be no later than 20 working days after it was received, unless an extension is made.
We will measure and report on progress on a regular basis
We will only approve a school-to-school student exchange scheme if it meets these requirements.
We will only collect personal information indirectly where the Privacy Act allows us to.
We will provide a separate video session on how to quality check the statement of cash flow and the notes and disclosures.
We will provide more detailed guidance in March that will cover off the new settings in more detail and how to meet the requirements under the regulations.
We will provide updates on further actions as decisions are made.
We will provide updates when available.
We will publish a webpage with more details as the work programme is developed.
We will search for any records we hold about you and we can provide you with a copy of this material. We will do this under the Privacy Act 2020.
We will search for records we hold about you.
We will support the growth of Pacific Languages in Education across early learning, schooling and tertiary education. This includes supporting the growth of bilingual and immersion education settings
We will tailor provision to reflect communities
We will talk through shortly the main differences
We will use a range of levers to support Pacific Languages in Education
We will use the levers by progressing the key actions identified in this Action Plan. You can find out about the actions we are continuing and starting and the actions we will take to grow Pacific languages in education in the full Action Plan for Pacific Education.
We will use the three categories set out in the
We will work with Pacific language communities to develop a pathway forward which best responds to their aspirations for Pacific Languages in Education, together with their community and sociolinguistic circumstances and relationships with the New Zealand Government. This work will be located within the context of our overall education system and will respond to the direction of the
We will work with you towards resolution. Your feedback helps us to improve what we do with you and others in the future.
We will write to you with our decision
We work with the Education Review Office (ERO) to make sure children receive quality education and care.
We're not really sure what to do.
We've got a question in the chat for TA from Tanya.
We've got a question in the chat for, from Alison
We've got another question from Donna coming in.
We've removed 11 of them.
We, if the parents had approved it, we gave them a,
We, there are no ministry guidelines around that.
Weathertightness design standards
Weathertightness design standards for school buildings
Web version ISBN 978-0-478-34175-1
Wednesday 1 October 2025: Quarter 4 operational funding instalment paid.
Welcome also my message and depart
Welcome to the ECE Funding Handbook. This handbook is issued under section 548(5) of the Education and Training Act 2020.
Well Child Tamariki Ora checks
Well Child Tamariki Ora checks are free for all children from 6 weeks up to 5 years of age.
Well maintained enrolment and attendance records provide evidence for community and Crown funding.
Well, what we've done is we have reduced the codes.
Wellbeing and safety support for tertiary students
Wellbeing support service
Were any conflicts of interest managed appropriately?
Westport Kindergarten Association
What Te Tira Hou is telling us
What a bus controller does
What a conflict of interest is
What a password policy is
What a school exchange is
What a strong password is
What about handwashing afterwards for parents and caregivers? Would hand sanitisers be useful?
What about high school students
What actions did we take?
What are children able to see or hear when they are in the home setting?
What are our expectations of the range of behaviours children will demonstrate in the early years and in stressful situations?
What are our own assumptions of how specialist support operates?
What are possible/potential occurrences at playgroup that could result in loss/damage/injury? Can we mitigate against these through Health and Safety policies and practices?
What are the limits and boundaries in our service? How are these negotiated and shared with children and their families?
What are they learning now?
What can adults do when they are at playgroup?
What can children see or hear when they are at the playgroup?
What can children see or hear when they are at the service? Consider areas designated for adults as well (for example offices and staff rooms), as children may have access to them at times.
What can we do to help this child progress?
What checks you need for adults who come into your school
What child protection requirements your school must meet
What code do you put then?
What did you enjoy doing today?
What did you like about learning this?
What do we know about the supports and services available to us in our local area?
What do we say by our actions? What goes unnoticed or unsaid? Do our actions match our words?
What do we say by our actions? What goes unnoticed, or unsaid? Do our actions match our words?
What do we understand about
What do we understand about the notion of
What do we understand about whanaungatanga? How is it reflected in our service?
What do we want to carry forward? Try more of? Try in different ways? Build on?
What do we want to introduce, continue with, adapt or abandon?
What do we want to know? (For example: Do the environment and our interactions encourage children to actively explore? Are we protecting the health and wellbeing of the youngest children in our playgroup?).
What do you do if the illness is contagious?
What enrolment schemes and school zones are
What handwashing practices are used? If relevant, what practices are used when wearing disposable gloves?
What happens after you apply
What happens at our place that reflects the importance of language/learning?
What happens during a Person responsible's visit to observe a child
What happens if a sight impaired family member of a child has a guide dog.
What happens if the educator becomes ill
What happens in early learning
What happens to your licence during an investigation
What happens when early learning services do not meet compliance
What happens when early learning services do not meet compliance.
What happens when parents and
What happens when we receive a complaint or report of an incident
What happens with visiting animals (such as pet days or farm animals).
What has changed in the refresh
What has happened that has made me think/wonder about/want to know more about?
What in I'm having Yeah, more morina.
What information can be shared
What information is available from your local council about emergency procedures?
What information is covered by this statement, and why we collect it
What intentional strategies do we use in our teaching practice that provide meaningful and purposeful interactions for children?
What intentional teaching strategies and practices do we provide to support
What intentional teaching strategies and practices do we provide to support mokopuna learning and the learning outcomes of
What is Targeted Funding for Disadvantage? - 13-1
What is academic integrity?
What is bullying and what you can do to support your child and your school to prevent bullying.
What is equity funding?: 10-1
What is important in this place and why? What do we know about our
What is important in this place and why? What do we know about our whenua? How will we explore the histories of this place?
What is the Government doing?
What is the child good at?
What is the child interested in now?
What is the potential for significant damage or loss?
What is the proximity of the hand basin to the toilet?
What is the value of the playgroup equipment? How much would it cost to replace?
What is viewed as social competence and appropriate behaviour may vary from setting to setting. In a hospital it will depend on the values that families, educators, and the hospital hold. It is therefore vital that educators, parents, the medical staff and children share with each other their understandings of social competence.
What is viewed as social competence, emotional competence and appropriate behaviour may vary from setting to setting and will depend on the values that parents and
What is viewed as social competence, emotional competence, and appropriate behaviour may vary from setting to setting, and will depend on the values that parents and
What items should be laundered and how often.
What kinds of images are children able to see in magazines and other print materials? What about posters, DVDs, electronic games, and television?
What kinds of review practices happen within the language used in engagement with children?
What learning have I noticed? (What have particular children been practising, trying hard to master, trying for the first time, doing in different ways or with different materials?)
What makes a good achievement challenge
What may be regarded as not objectionable under the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification Act may, nevertheless, be inappropriate and harmful to children given the impact of the medium in which the publication is presented and the age of the children to whom the publication is available.
What may be regarded as not objectionable under the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification Act may, nevertheless, be inappropriate and harmful to young children given the impact of the medium in which the publication is presented and the age of the children to whom the publication is available.
What opportunities are there for children and parents and
What opportunities are there for the children in our service take part in events and customs of cultural significance?
What opportunities might exist for
What opportunity is there for educators, teachers and
What opportunity is there for parents, caregivers and educators to contribute to hazard and risk management systems, processes and practice?
What other learning is happening while eating? For example, using utensils, textures, colours, appropriate social interactions.
What period does it cover?
What procedures are there for preventing and responding to bullying behaviour?
What processes does the building owner have for maintaining the Civil Defence kit and emergency drills?
What public transport means
What purchases need to be made this year?
What purposeful and intentional teaching opportunities do we provide for children to practice and enhance their developing social and emotional competency?
What role does a language-rich environment play in the transmission of culture?
What salary scale described in the ECE Funding Handbook is your service using to determine the minimum salaries paid to all employed ECE and primary qualified certificated teachers?
What salary scale described in the ECE funding handbook is your service using to determine the minimum salaries paid to all employed ECE and primary qualified certificated teachers?
What schools must report on
What sort of assessments are we using to assess the support we need?
What sort of codes would we use for those situations?
What storage facilities are available?
What support is available
What support is available for students who are involved in bullying?
What teaching qualifications are recognised
What the Action Plan for Pacific Education is
What the Export Education Levy is for, the rate tertiary providers must pay, and how to submit data and payments.
What the Memorandum of Understanding says
What the appropriate ratios are (for example is the excursion going to be near water?)
What the network of schools is
What the pay parity opt-in scheme is
What the person responsible role involves
What this data will be used for
What to bring on the first day
What to do after an accident or incident
What to do at the time of an accident or incident
What to do if children become ill while at the service
What to do if the educator is working in the home of the child and an adult present at the premises consumes alcohol in the presence of the educator and/or child.
What to do if you need more support
What to do if your password is compromised
What to include in the documented process
What to think about when using AI tools
What type of emergencies might occur in your area and what will you need to do if they occur?
What type of incident/complaint would initiate a spontaneous review?
What we do with the information we collect
What we learned during the response to the COVID-19 pandemic, and what we heard from
What we share on social media
What we've also got was through our, uh,
What were the outcomes of those actions?
What will my RS7 look like?
What would staff do if a parent or caregiver arrived to drop off or collect a child and they were under the influence of alcohol or any other substance?
What would the educator do if a parent or caregiver arrived to drop off or collect a child and they were under the influence of alcohol or any other substance?
What would you do if a visitor arrived, and they were under the influence of alcohol or any other substance?
What would your playgroup community do if a parent or caregiver arrived to drop off or collect a child or they intend to stay and they were under the influence of alcohol or any other substance?
What you need to bring will depend on what your service provides for your child. They will tell you what you should bring along. This might include:
What you provide, what you do and how you do it
What you'd put in a statement of philosophy
What your child learns at early learning
What's new for Term 2 2025
When a July roll is used, the adjustment is worked at as five-eighteenths of the Year 1 roll, rounded up to the nearest whole number.
When a March roll is used, the adjustment is worked out as eleven-twelfths of the Year 1 roll, rounded up to the nearest whole number.
When a centre takes some children on an excursion and some children remain at the centre, the first aid qualification ratio must be met both on the excursion and at the centre.
When a child becomes ill at a centre, the sooner they can be taken home, the better. The centre is not usually set up to deal with sick children for long periods of time, although an area away from other children at the centre where sick children can rest comfortably under supervision, while waiting to be taken home is required. For more information see PF27 Isolation area.
When a child becomes ill at a home that is not their own, the sooner they can be taken home, the better. In order for them to be kept at a safe distance from other children at the home the educator will need a separate area for them that can be easily supervised whilst looking after other children attending. For more information see the guidance for PF14 Isolation area.
When a child becomes unexpectedly ill at a centre, there needs to be somewhere for their care to make the sick child feel comfortable, as well as to keep other children from becoming ill until the sick child can be collected and taken home. The child must be able to be supervised. If the child is isolated in a separate room with an adult, the service must maintain adult to child ratios.
When a child becomes unexpectedly ill attending the home-based service, there needs to be somewhere for their care to make the sick child feel comfortable, as well as to keep other children from becoming ill until the sick child or other children at the home can be collected and taken home. The child must be able to be supervised. If the child is isolated in a separate room the educator should carry out regular checks every 10 to 15 minutes, as they would do with a sleeping child.
When a child does not attend on their planned start-date, one week of absences will be funded if:
When a closed service is part of a group of services operated by one service provider, any overpayment will be deducted from the next payment to the service provider.
When a conflict is declared, a conflict management plan must be agreed by:
When a parent agrees to pay an optional charge, the specific items covered by the charge, and the agreement to pay the charge must be part of the enrolment process and recorded on the enrolment agreement.
When a person responsible is supervising across multiple rooms, they should be moving between these areas to effectively supervise and fulfil their responsibilities. There is no requirement to assign children or staff to each person responsible or for there to be a person responsible in every room.
When a service has received less funding than it is eligible for, the amount of any underpayments will be credited to the bank account nominated by the service provider as soon as is reasonably possible. However, the Ministry may choose to verify whether services are eligible for any underpayments of funding before these are made, for example by way of a funding claim audit.
When a service is closed for renovations.
When achievement challenges are refreshed, you must send a copy to your regional office for review and approval by the Director of Education. Once approved, we will replace the original achievement challenge with the refreshed version on Education Counts.
When administering medicine check that the:
When an educator is not available (for example, due to illness), funding cannot be claimed if no care is provided. If there is a replacement educator, funding can be claimed only for the educator who provided alternative care. Funding cannot be claimed:
When an illness appears to be affecting many children or adults, the service should contact their local public health unit for information and advice.
When and how funding is paid: 2-4
When assessing the safety of sleep furniture and items, the following need to be considered:
When carrying out these functions, we may require or collect a range of personal and other information about services.
When changes are made to the assessment, planning, and evaluation process how do we ensure they are effective?
When changing SMS or to ELI Web, services must begin sending information to the Ministry within 8 weeks from the cutover date. The cutover date is your first day using the new SMS or ELI Web.
When children leave the premises on a regular or special excursion, the excursion must be approved by the person responsible.
When children leave the premises on a regular or special outing or excursion the outing or excursion must be approved by the person responsible.
When children leave the premises on an excursion:
When children of different ages are together in the same space, it is very important that the environment is set up to allow infants and toddlers to explore and play safely. This can be done in ways that let them be part of the playgroup community and learn alongside other children while making sure they are safe and able to move without restrictions or limitations.
When children of varying levels of ability and mobility are together in the same activity space, it is very important the environment is designed with infants and toddlers in mind so they can safely play and explore, both indoors and outdoors. This does not mean that infants and toddlers cannot move throughout the centre, learning alongside older children.
When children of varying levels of ability and mobility are together in the same activity space, it is very important the environment is designed with infants and toddlers in mind so they can safely play and explore. This does not mean that infants and toddlers cannot move throughout the ECE activity room, learning alongside older children.
When children should stay away from the service
When choosing a disinfectant/sanitiser, it is important to be aware that not all disinfectants are effective against the broad spectrum of germs which can cause illness.
When considering how to provide children with safe and hygienic places to sit while eating you might like to think about:
When consultation is needed
When deciding if a closing for instruction day is appropriate, we recommend boards consider the following.
When deciding whether to approve a place in a vehicle, we will consider:
When deciding which objects to secure, consider the height of the shelf or table it is on. A television falling off a low stand could still injure an infant lying on the floor nearby.
When doing access reviews, you should check:
When entering data please ensure that all balances are in whole dollars as it will save with balancing at completion.
When food is provided by parents
When implementing least privileges, your school should prioritise systems that are:
When informing parents by phone, ascertain where possible whether they have other adult support to deal with the event, for example support to look after other children, transport and so on.
When is it more appropriate to inform the police rather than trying to prevent an adult from removing a child from the premises?
When it might be appropriate to temporarily relocate the centre.
When looking for an exchange partner, consider if your school:
When meals or snacks are eaten outside there are some safety and hygiene issues to consider.
When meals or snacks are eaten outside, there are some safety and hygiene issues to consider:
When mokopuna experience stable and consistent relationships with educators it enhances their learning, diverse strengths, and wellbeing. The service provider should consider how the organisation of staffing fosters opportunities for meaningful, positive, and consistent relationships between children and educators.
When notifying parents of an accident or incident in person, think about the sensitivity of the situation and the need for privacy away from the presence of children and other parents.
When people need to be safety checked
When playgroups meet in buildings that are also used for other purposes or by other groups, it is possible for children to be exposed to inappropriate or disturbing material. Posters, magazines, pamphlets, and so on, that are intended for adults might be disturbing or inappropriate for young children.
When requesting donations, services must ensure that donations are not described as fees, or by any other term that implies that they are compulsory.
When securing these items, the following guidelines will be useful.
When securing these items, the following guidelines will be useful:
When selecting an option, the respondent must ensure that their service has paid all employed certificated teachers at least the minimum salary for the period of the RS7 return.
When selecting an option, your service is identifying what steps of the Minimum Salary Scale for Certificated Teachers and the Minimum Salary Scale for Management Positions your service will use to pay the minimum salary for all employed certificated teachers. This selection is used to determine your initial funding rate.
When setting and reviewing the budget, the service can:
When setting and reviewing the budget, the service provider can:
When standing in the doorway, do you have direct sight of the child on the toilet?
When the design requirements apply
When thinking about how to enclose your centre, consider:
When to apply the frequent absence rule
When to complete attestations
When to keep your child at home if they are ill, and what happens if they become sick or are injured while at an early learning service.
When to send your financial report
When unexpected emergency circumstances force a service to close temporarily.
When using private vehicles consider how the following will be checked:
When we are able to, we release these documents with some lines removed according to the Official Information Act. See the list of withholding grounds below.
When we have made a decision, we will tell you in writing.
When you are thinking about the type of outdoor equipment to provide for children, keep in mind that the outdoor area at your playgroup does not serve the same function as a public playground. Equipment will need to engage and challenge children for greater periods of time and be flexible enough for children to construct their own learning. Flexible, moveable equipment allows children choice and control over how their learning environment is set up. Moveable equipment also encourages co-operation between children and provides opportunities for problem solving.
When you can, try to fasten objects near the top rather than at the bottom. If you cannot, then the fastenings at the bottom will need to be very strong. This is because of the leverage effect when something topples (a fridge for example).
When you contact us, include your:
When you drive down into the car park, you will see a keypad on your right-hand side just before the gates. Press the number 3 then the symbol showing the bell. This will ring through to reception who will take your call and open the gates for you (instructions are also noted near the keypad).
When you homeschool, you are fully responsible for your child's learning and can set your own curriculum. Your
When you lodge a claim with us, there is some information we need from you to get the process started.
When you prepare your RS7 return, services need to:
When you receive your Certificate of Exemption, you can start home educating your child from the date on your certificate. If the exemption is issued before your child turns 6 years, your starting date will be their sixth birthday.
When your child enrols with an early learning service they will be allocated a NSN number from us. This is connected to their birth registration number and becomes their number for their entire education journey.
Whenever children leave the premises on an excursion:
Where a certificated teacher is employed part-time in a teaching or management role and part-time in another role, the certificated teacher is eligible to receive the pro-rata allowance for all hours connected to their employment in a teaching role or management position.
Where a certificated teacher is employed part-time in a teaching role and part-time in a non-teaching role, the service provider must pay the certificated teacher at least the relevant salary amount on the applicable Minimum Salary Scale for Certificated Teachers when they are employed in a teaching role.
Where a certificated teacher, employed in a non-teaching role, engages in a teaching role regularly (for example to cover breaks), they should be paid at least the relevant salary amount on the Minimum Salary Scales for Certificated Teachers for all hours they are engaged in a teaching role.
Where a certificated teacher, employed in a non-teaching role, engages in a teaching role regularly, for example to regularly cover breaks, they are eligible to receive the allowance for all hours they are engaged in a teaching role.
Where a parent is the employer of an educator, the home-based educator top up payment still applies as a cost to the parent, but is not directly charged by the educator.
Where a service provides food, a record of the daily menu outlining the ingredients will meet this requirement. Menus are required to be specific in case of an unexpected allergic reaction. For example, what type of fruit or the contents of a sandwich must be recorded to satisfy this requirement.
Where a teacher generally works more or less than 40 hours per week, the salary should be calculated to ensure the required hourly rate is maintained.
Where a teacher has been assessed as not meeting the appropriate Standards for their category of practising certificate, salary progression may be deferred. For each teacher to progress to their next step they will need to demonstrate that they meet the appropriate professional Standards.
Where access to first aid training for an educator is limited, a record of the actions taken by the service provider to ensure the educator has knowledge of first aid and achieves a first aid qualification within 4 months of starting work at the service.
Where access to first aid training is limited, the service provider must record their decision to apply the condition, including:
Where an individual home-based educator is not able to provide education and care due to a non-controllable health and safety issue stemming from an infectious disease:
Where applicable, enrolment records must include details of any transitional school visits (see Section 7-8 for details) and details of
Where children are involved in food preparation on a regular basis for consumption by others, food hygiene practices must be maintained and children supervised and provided with guidance around not eating the food and discarding dropped items. There should be utensils provided for children and appropriate surfaces should be used.
Where children are involved in food preparation on a regular basis for consumption by others, food hygiene practices must be maintained and children supervised and provided with guidance around not eating the food and discarding dropped items. There should be utensils provided for children to use and appropriate surfaces should be used.
Where children wearing nappies attend, there are safe and hygienic nappy changing facilities.
Where children wearing nappies attend, there is a space (away from the play space and any food preparation areas) available for changing nappies.
Where cots are used, these should be sturdy, easily washable (PF21, below) and allow good airflow (HS9).
Where cots are used, these should be sturdy, easily washable (PF30, below) and allow good airflow (HS10).
Where do the notions of child-centred, child-initiated, and child-directed learning fit into all of this?
Where does self-review fit into the curriculum framework?
Where dogs brought at pick-up and drop-off should be tied (not immediately at the gate where children are passing).
Where food is provided by parents the service promotes and encourages healthy eating guidelines
Where food is provided by parents, the service promotes best practices as set out in the Ministry of Health's guide and must provide to all parents at the time of enrolment a copy of the pamphlet: Reducing food-related choking for babies and young children at early learning services.
Where food is provided by the service
Where food is provided by the service, foods that pose a high choking risk are not to be served unless prepared in accordance with best practice as set out in Ministry of Health's guide: Reducing food-related choking for babies and young children at early learning services.
Where food is provided by the service, it is of sufficient variety, quantity and quality to meet the nutritional and developmental needs of each child
Where information in these documents has not been released, the relevant Official Information Act 1982 grounds for withholding have been noted.
Where is the most hygienic place to change nappies?
Where is your list of emergency contact phone numbers?
Where is your local civil defence meeting place?
Where possible place toy boxes and popular play equipment and resources away from the free fall zones of larger appliances and shelves as well as large glass areas.
Where possible, we align the end of the first term with the Easter holidays. This can make Term 1 shorter or longer depending on when Easter falls.
Where practical it is preferable that children are seated in a chair with their food directly in front of them to prevent the child needing to twist to the left or right, which can cause them to lose control of the food in their mouth.
Where sign-in/sign-out sheets are not used by a service, a snapshot of actual attendance in the playroom and ward (where appropriate) is recorded for an average week in March and July. Attendance time is marked in half hour slots noting the names of children participating in the playroom and the ward. A sample form can be found in Appendix 2.
Where some components of the safety check have been completed by another organisation on their behalf, the centre/service is responsible for confirming that these components have been completed, and that a full safety check has been done.
Where structures or equipment have not been designed, built and installed by a commercial manufacturer, as a minimum, centres need to demonstrate:
Where the home is located at a rural property with farm animals, the educator will need to be aware of any animals in the vicinity of the home and ensure children are supervised when interacting with them.
Where the minimum entitlements were not met, some current and former employees are eligible to receive a remediation payment.
Where there are electronic devices, they should be used under the direct supervision of the educator.
Where there is a serious injury or illness or incident involving a child while at the playgroup, the service provider must notify us as soon as practicable after the event.
Where there is a serious injury or illness or incident involving a child while at the service that is required to be notified to a specified agency, the service provider must also notify the Ministry of Education at the same time.
Where there is evidence of greater than 50 anticipated enrolments, and/or that there will be at least 51 children attending at any one time, the service provider must show evidence of meeting the requirement for 2 persons responsible.
Where there is evidence of less than 50 anticipated enrolments, the licence maximum will be set at 50 child places (or less, as required in the circumstances). The service provider will be required to name 1 person responsible for this licence.
Where there is serious injury or illness or incident involving a child while at the services that is required to be notified to a specified agency, the service provider must also notify
Where timeframes are an issue, the media team checks with the reporter to make sure they want to proceed with their request before referring the request to the Official Information team to provide a response.
Where we obtain information using statutory powers, we are clear about the powers we have and the reasons for collecting the information.
Where will staff go if they need to meet privately with a parent? Is there a place where parents can feel comfortable at the centre?
Where will staff go to have their breaks when children are attending all day?
Whether closing for instruction may be aligned with other schools in their local area.
Whether records are stored in paper-based or electronic format they must meet the following conditions:
Whether the educator will need to get parent help or the help of another adult
Which hours can be claimed as 20 hours ECE
Which schools and kura have Healthy School Lunches
Which schools and kura have Ka Ora, Ka Ako Healthy School Lunches
Which way do children face when using the hand basin? Are they in front of the child or to the side of the child?
While primary responsibility for transporting children to and from school rests with their caregivers, we can help in certain circumstances.
While the activities, resources, experiences, events and routines that occur, or are available during playgroup are important, the principles and strands of
While the number of operating days in the first 5 months is collected on the RS3 form, new services do not necessarily receive advance funding for five months in their first payment.
While the six worksheets are selected, highlight Column C to J. Right click on your mouse or other pointing device and select Format Cells click on Fill and then select the white as the background colour. Click on Font and then Colour and choose the black theme colour. Click on OK.
While there is discharge from the eyes
White 'a' on a black background
Who can be a person responsible
Who can certify a qualification
Who can get extraordinary roll growth funding
Who can get the allowance
Who can get transport assistance
Who can request information
Who cannot get support from SESTA
Who counts as adult when applying ratios
Who is responsible for enrolment schemes
Who needs to be Police vetted at school
Who needs to be safety checked
Who needs to be safety checked at school
Who needs to be safety checked?
Who pays the Export Education Levy
Who should have and manage 2FA
Who we share your information with
Who will be involved in review and evaluation?
Who will be involved when extra support is needed?
Who will our service need to work with in a reciprocal and responsive way as part of making the decision to implement
Who's responsible for the statement of philosophy
Whose knowledge is of value?
Whose knowledge is viewed as the most valuable?
Why least privilege is important
Why practice emergency drills?
Why schools have different term dates
Why strong passwords are important
Why the STAR and what it means
Why we collect personal information
Will our staffing needs change?
Will the playgroup provide a changing table or mat for everyone at the playgroup to use, or will the group agree that each person brings their own portable mat if needed?
Wire stranded farm fencing restricts movements of animals but not children, and additional covering will be required particularly when water troughs, roads, animals or farm machinery are nearby.
With only these two Excel workbooks open, the new model and the old model, we're going to try synchronizing the scrolling of the worksheets vertically and side-by-side. This allows us to make sure the schematics of the old model can be copied onto the new model and save us a lot of time.
With your consent, we can also help you get your records from a school.
Withdrawing a student's place on the bus
Withholding grounds under the Official Information Act 1982
Within each group there are separate rates for children aged under 2, and children aged 2 and over.
Within these regulations, services can set their own rules about things like:
Wording cannot be changed, (e.g privacy statement) except to add relevant details for your service. The Enrolment Agreement Form with the required wording can be found in Appendix 2 of this Handbook.
Work continues next year to house the Phonics Checks materials (including all marking and reporting systems) in a single online space.
Work out how many adults you will be required to employ for the number of children (every half hour) and write this number in the planned staff column.
Work out the minimum salary step for certificated teachers covered by the pay parity scheme.
Work out the right salary step for your certificated teachers
Work out your regulated (ratio) staff requirement for each block of time. This should be based on the maximum number of children who attended during each block of time.
Work reciprocally with diverse Pacific communities to respond to unmet needs, including growing and supporting Pacific bilingual and immersion education pathways.
Work underway on a new assessment and aromatawai tool
Work with your child's teacher
WorkSafe bulletin on managing strangulation hazards on play equipment.
WorkSafe information on managing strangulation hazards on play equipment
WorkSafe information on risks in ECE services.
WorkSafe information on risks in education
Workforce restriction and core worker exemption
Worksheet: Community network map
Worksheet: Describing your community and engagement consideration
Worksheet: How do you want to be involved in school planning
Worksheet: Self-reflection tool
World class Inclusive Public Education: New Zealand education is trusted and sustainable.
Write a procurement recommendation report
Write down the requirements
Write down your regulated (ratio) staff requirement for each block of time.
Write the number of days the service will be open and operating as all-day for each month in the boxes provided.
Write the number of days the service will be open and operating as sessional for each month in the boxes provided.
Written agreement with partner school
Written approval for regular excursions may be obtained via a signature on the enrolment form, provided the information also informs parents of the planned adult:child ratio.
Written information letting parents know how to access:
Written information letting parents know:
Written procedure for safety checks
Yeah, I think, so. This was around, um, guidelines given
Yeah, and it's an interesting one
Yeah, interesting. 'cause we had the same thing
Yeah, it is, it's a question mark until it's, uh,
Yeah, it's a, that's a difficult one.
Yeah, it's, it's the same for primary. Yep.
Yeah, no, that, that's exactly right.
Yeah, so in the moment in the guidance, it's uh,
Yeah, tha thank you Jared.
Yeah, that's a really good question.
Yeah, that's a, that's a good question
Yeah, that, uh, Tanya, how about students
Yeah, we have this, uh, so I said
Yeah. And, and one thing I wanted to say is the, um, yeah,
Yeah. But I guess this is where we need to, again,
Years of experience of certificated
Years of experience of certificated kaiako service at an immersion and bilingual level
Years of experience of certificated teacher service at an immersion and bilingual level
Yes, no. Are they in class? Yes, no.
Yes. The ATIS is available to licensed ECE services, with an Isolation Index of 1.65 or greater, which also meet certain income requirements.
Yes. Um, just speaking about SMS programs,
You also have the right to ask the Ombudsman to investigate and review any decision to refuse a request for official information.
You are also responsible for letting the school know if your child is moving schools.
You are always able to see legal advice on your options, and we will reimburse any actual and reasonable legal costs.
You are eligible for quality funding rates if you have adults present with certain qualifications. For specific details see 3-C-3.
You are eligible for quality funding rates if you have:
You are more likely to receive a payment if you have:
You are not required to have a lawyer to make a claim with us, but you are free to seek legal advice at any stage of the process. If you have a lawyer, correspondence about your claim will be through them.
You are now ready to print the financial statements.
You are required to keep a record showing you have provided opportunities for parents and caregivers to contribute to decision-making processes. If meetings are held, recording attendance and decisions and then providing minutes of the meeting could be considered a record. If surveys or questionnaires are used, keep a copy of the collated responses and how you have provided feedback to group members about any actions taken.
You are responsible for getting your child to the bus stop, and for teaching them how to stay safe on and around the bus.
You are responsible for making sure your child is ready to be collected at the agreed time each day. You must meet the driver and provide any help your child needs to get in and out of the vehicle. School staff are responsible for the loading and unloading of students at the school.
You are still required to safety check all children's workers under the Children's Act 2014.
You are unable to access this email address
You are welcome to create a hyperlink to this site from another website. But this link must not be presented on your site in any context that implies that this website has an association with your site or endorses your site or product.
You can access the NSI through the web application or your NSI-integrated student management system (SMS). There are user guides available on the application website.
You can also bring along any documentation you have if you think this information will help the assessor.
You can also choose to have a full assessment and accept the settlement offer.
You can also contact us if you have a concern about a homeschooled child.
You can also contact your local Ministry office or visit the Teaching Council of
You can also go to other agencies at any stage of the complaints process.
You can also report the incident to:
You can also send us a general enquiry before making an OIA request.
You can also talk to your doctor or another healthcare provider.
You can also watch our video on revised attendance codes.
You can apply for a boarding allowance for a secondary school or kura student if you are their legal parent or guardian.
You can apply for a licence for your centre-based or home-based early learning service.
You can apply for the daily bus conveyance allowance using our online form, or your school can apply on your behalf. Once you complete the application, it is sent to your school to sign off.
You can apply online for a place onboard a vehicle, the SESTA Conveyance Allowance, or both. Talk to your school before applying as they need to support your application.
You can apply to home educate your child at any age between 6 and 16.
You can assign NSNs for your students and update existing NSI records that your students may already have. Students who have been enrolled in the New Zealand education system before will have an NSN. Check to see if a student has a current NSN before creating a new one.
You can calculate your average monthly roll using the roll data on the application form.
You can change attendance data after is has been submitted by updating the code in your SMS. You should make these changes as soon as possible after the day of absence.
You can choose to use this service, or another service that meets the appropriate standards.
You can complete your Staff Record either:
You can contact TeachNZ on
You can contact us in a number of ways:
You can create quieter spaces for children simply by using low partitions that children can snuggle up against, especially with a few cushions around, and carpet or rugs to sit on.
You can create quieter spaces for children simply by using low partitions.
You can differentiate the accounts by name. For example:
You can discuss your baby's feeding schedule and amounts with staff when you enrol.
You can expect to see a specific privacy statement at the time of collection.
You can find details of the Budget 24 Vote Education package, including fact sheets, in the links below.
You can find home-based education providers by searching online or in your community.
You can find information about performance reviews in the performance management starter pack.
You can find more information here:
You can find more information on all of the actions in the full Action Plan for Pacific Education.
You can find out how to access the PLD here:
You can find out if a school uses cohort entry by looking at their listing on Education Counts.
You can find out what hours an early learning service offers by going to their website or contacting them. Some services also have information on social media.
You can find review reports on ERO's website.
You can find the Strategy online here
You can find the full Action Plan for Pacific Education online, here:
You can find them on the New Zealand Legislation website or any bookstore that sells government publications.
You can follow your own processes for this, or use our complaint or incident investigation templates.
You can have as many persons responsible above requirements as you want. For example, you may choose to have a person responsible in every room.
You can invite external users to access your systems to collaborate with your school. This is common for Google Workspace and Microsoft 365.
You can make a complaint in writing or in an email, by ringing us or at a face-to-face meeting.
You can never have more children than the maximum stated on your Certificate of Licence.
You can put your claim on hold at any time.
You can read more about these benefits here-
You can read the MOU on the Teaching Council's website.
You can request a copy of information we hold about you by emailing
You can request a review of an eligibility decision by emailing the School Transport team.
You can request the SESTA Conveyance Allowance as an alternative to a place in a vehicle.
You can see the list of recognised qualifications here.
You can set access rules for your logins, such as only ask for 2FA every 2 weeks, or only when not on school grounds. This is called context-aware access.
You can stop the counting of time for limitation purposes by filing your claim in court. But the limitation policy means that time you spend engaging with a sensitive claims process is not counted for the purposes of calculating timeframes under limitation law. This means that you will not be disadvantaged if you try and resolve your claim directly with the Ministry before filing your claim in court.
You can submit your RS7 with a different salary scale if you are already paying your teachers at that scale.
You can use our annual report template to help you complete the components of your annual report. Annual reports have no set template, and the use of this template is optional. You can amend this template to meet the needs of your school or
You can use our supplier performance review tools to manage their performance.
You can use these optional templates to create your strategic plan, annual implementation plan and annual report. You can adapt them to suit your school,
You can use your report to inform conversations with staff and your school board about student attendance patterns and unjustified absences in your school.
You can view your entitlement staffing in Pourato.
You can visit your child at their early learning service to breastfeed them. Talk to your service about this when you enrol.
You can write to the school board if you are unhappy with how the school is managing the bullying problem. You should explain the problem and what you want the board to do.
You can't be charged fees for any of the 20 hours that your child has signed up to receive 20 hours ECE for.
You cannot share a Police vet with other agencies or accept a Police vet from them.
You cannot temporarily move into a zone in order to get your child into a school.
You could also get this allowance if your child travels in one of our vehicles but we can't take them all the way between home and school.
You do not need to develop a new strategic plan for 2025, but your board can amend your current strategic plan if you wish.
You do not need to use one of the procurement plan templates, but your property advisor might ask for some of the details of the project. We recommend you talk to your property advisor as they may know of similar projects or available funding.
You have a big part to play in your child's wellbeing. Everyday things, like spending time with them, make a big difference. You can support your child's wellbeing at home by:
You have the right to access your personal information which we hold. You also have the right to request the correction of personal information held about you if you think it is wrong.
You have to apply for a boarding allowance by 31 October to receive the full amount of funding the following year.
You have to complete a home education application form and submit it to your regional office. If you have more than one child, you must apply for each child individually.
You have to pay optional charges if you agreed to pay them when you enrolled. Your early learning service should tell you that you won't be penalised if you don't agree to pay. But they can take away the extra items or services that the charge covers.
You may be able to apply for assistance from Work and Income New Zealand for those hours.
You may be able to lodge a sensitive claim with the Ministry of Education if you believe you were abused (physical, sexual, psychological), mistreated or neglected, and you believe that the experience has harmed you in some way when you attended:
You may be aware that, along with many other government agencies and New Zealand businesses, we were not compliant with the Holidays Act 2003. This was due to former system configuration issues and how the allocation of entitlements was calculated at that time.
You may choose to use this approved screening service, but you are not obliged to do so. You can conduct your checks through another service.
You may decide that the amount you are owed is not worth continuing with the process of uploading your documents and details. See the process below.
You may find it useful to bookmark this page so that it is easily accessible.
You may find that some first aid training providers are starting to phase out the availability of this course.
You may have a child who turns 2 but stays on temporarily at your service. In these cases, you should meet ratios for mixed age services and can apply Regulation 44A.
You may have to pay a fee for any hours outside 20 hours ECE that your child attends an early childhood service or
You may like to calculate the proportion of Certificated Teacher Hours in advance of receiving your funding advice notice. The calculation is:
You may need to keep track of equipment for insurance purposes. It is useful to check with the owner of the playgroup venue to see if playgroup equipment is covered by their insurance policy.
You may still be able to apply to enrol your child at a school if you live outside its enrolment zone. Your child is not guaranteed a place at the school. This depends on how many out-of-zone applications the school gets, and how many extra places are available after all the in-zone students have enrolled.
You may use our template when contacting successful suppliers.
You may want to consider the needs of children when they are toilet training. Often young children cannot wait to go to the toilet.
You may want to consider under floor heating, particularly in centres catering for infants and toddlers.
You may want to consider wheelchair access and a suitable space for older children who require nappies.
You might also need to provide:
You must also show any safety check records to other agencies if requested. This is permitted under the Children's Act.
You must comply with these requirements.
You must declare any conflict interest you have to the school board before the buying process begins. Use our conflict of interest declaration and management plan template to do this.
You must declare any conflict of interest you have if the property procurement you are involved with costs $10,000 or more.
You must enable Javascript in your browser in order to decode the e-mail address
You must follow our guidelines when doing a risk assessment and show this in your decision-making. This is required under Schedule 4 of the Education and Training Act 2020.
You must follow your early learning service's child protection policy.
You must get permission from the copyright owner to use:
You must get permission to reproduce such material from the copyright holders. This includes material on websites you access via links from this site.
You must have a list of all the qualified and certificated teachers displayed in the entrance of your service. There is no explicit requirement for services to show who acts in the person responsible role under GMA1. But it may be helpful to both staff and parents to clearly state who can act in the role in the same document that is used to display the full names and qualifications of each person who counts towards regulated qualification requirements.
You must have a record of all safety checks on adults and the results.
You must have a written agreement with the overseas partner school covering:
You must have a written procedure for safety checking children's workers.
You must include a completed deliverables checklist with your review submission.
You must keep a Police vet for at least as long as the person vetted is employed or engaged. That person must be told how long the information is kept, and why. If the information is used for an audit, you must have the person's permission for this before they are Police vetted.
You must let the school know if your child is going to be absent.
You must make sure no adults at your service are under the influence of alcohol or any other substance. This includes during drop-offs and pick-ups of children.
You must not engage or employ a person with a specified offence in a core children's worker role unless they have a core worker exemption. This is outlined in the licensing criteria.
You must not use a safety check completed by a children's worker's previous employer.
You must pay all certificated teachers at least the applicable salary step on the minimum salary scale you have attested to. There are 3 factors involved in working out the salary step.
You must provide a Police vet to us if we request it.
You must provide pastoral care for both inbound and outbound students in line with the Code.
You must record inbound students in ENROL and select the appropriate eligibility criteria.
You must report all incidents of physical restraint to us using the online portal. We use this to plan which schools need our support.
You must run an open tender via the Government Electronic Tender Service (GETS).
You must show us your procedures and any safety check records, if we ask for these.
You must submit data to us using our data collection portal.
You must tell us how many students take part in the scheme each year.
You must tell us if your child:
You must understand the geographic area you want to start your service in and decide the type of service you want to establish.
You must use one of our procurement plan templates. Procurements of $100,000 or more must use one of the full plan templates.
You must use our attendance codes when recording attendance in your SMS. Each student must be marked with one of these codes for each period or half day that the school is open for instruction.
You must work out the right initial salary step for your certificated teachers. This is a requirement of the pay parity scheme.
You need an Education Sector Logon (ESL) account to use
You need to keep accurate roll returns for auditing. This includes keeping documents to support the information you provide in your returns.
You need to keep records of the emergency drills.
You need to understand the different roles in the procurement process before you begin.
You should aim to hold your emergency drills at times when you have typical numbers of children, of varying ages, and adults at the centre. Consider also the timing of emergency drills and whether or not staff will be notified in advance. Holding unannounced emergency drills at challenging times (for example, during lunch time or sleep time) may be inconvenient but will give greater assurance that procedures are effective. Roles for adults could be varied during emergency drills so that any key responsibilities are covered even in the absence of a particular staff member.
You should aim to hold your trial emergency drills at times when you have typical numbers of children, of varying ages, and adults at the centre. Consider also the timing of the emergency drills and whether or not staff will be notified in advance. Holding unannounced emergency drills at challenging times (for example during lunch time or sleep time) may be inconvenient but will give greater assurance that procedures are effective. Roles for adults could be varied during emergency drills so that any key responsibilities are covered even in the absence of a particular staff member.
You should also note that the Ministry of Education's ECE funding handbook requires records to be kept showing actual staffing levels and child attendance (as opposed to planned staffing levels). Your staffing schedule could be designed so that it can also be used as a staffing record for the purposes of funding. You can find an example in Appendix 2 of the funding handbook. Some software providers have packages available to assist services.
You should also tell us if you move house or go overseas.
You should discuss any concerns with the person who was vetted as part of your assessment.
You should keep a certified copy of educator qualifications, or a record of learning from NZQA. A letter stating an educator has completed their training is not evidence of a qualification.
You should keep the injury/illness/incident record for 2 years from the date of the incident.
You should make a referral to our attendance service application if:
You should obtain multiple competitive quotes where possible.
You should review your emergency plans and evacuation procedures at least once a year. Records of each trial evacuation should be used to inform that review. If any changes are required to your evacuation procedures, these should be noted promptly in your evacuation plans and any other documentation and notices updated. Remember also to communicate to all staff, family and others if you have made any changes.
You should still use a strong password and have good security practices when using your devices.
You should use 2FA on as many accounts as possible. We recommend having set up 2FA as follows:
You will also have policies and procedures for using information in the Police vet to support employment decisions. These should be reviewed regularly so they align with the Act and our guidelines.
You will also need to safety check anyone new you recruit.
You will be sent a reminder of how and when to access this end of year payroll information in January.
You will find the checklist showing the five components required included in the link above under the heading Annual Report Checklist.
You will need some low tables and chairs for children to sit at while working at collage, etc. A carpet square is a versatile work area for reading, blocks, puzzles, and so on.
You will need the following information:
You will need to ensure that children and adults who handle animals practice thorough handwashing procedures afterwards.
You will need to fill out an enrolment form, which your early learning service will give to you.
You will need to pay to use a screening service.
You will need to provide a plan outlining the variety of learning experiences and play opportunities the playgroup will provide. Examples of planning documentation can be found in Appendix 3.
You will need to provide the Ministry with your final funded child hours (FCH) and Certificated Teacher Hours (if applicable).
You will need to send your financial information to the Ministry by
You will need to think about a process for parents to manage situations where an adult present at the premises wishes to smoke or vape. This will include the outside area when children are present.
You will need to think about how you make your statement of operation available for people to read. Some playgroups put their statement of operation up on the wall while others provide parents and caregivers with written information (on a pamphlet or newsletter) when they first come to playgroup, so they know what to expect.
You will only need a tempering valve if the centre has a hot water cylinder.
You will see lower down on this page, information related to the annual reporting process.
You will see we have entered minus $4,000 here.
YouTube community guidelines
Young children are learning at a very fast rate. They are learning language skills, developing opinions and interests and coping with change as well as learning about themselves and their abilities. Children at playgroup need space that:
Young children: about 2.5 to 5 years old
Young parents aged 16 to 19 can get help with childcare costs.
Younger children will be unable to wait for turns or to share equipment, so it is realistic to provide several of each item, (for example spades in sandpit), if you have several toddlers in your group.
Your Certificate of Exemption is valid until your child turns 16 or enrols in a registered school (whichever occurs first). You can continue to home educate your child after they turn 16. An exemption is not required to do this.
Your IT provider or IT lead can help you with this. Google and Microsoft have more information about enforcing password requirements on mobile devices. If someone finds the device, the data on it is protected with a password.
Your SMS will submit this information to the Ministry on your behalf (from 6pm).
Your bank account details (this must be a New Zealand bank account).
Your board needs to complete the following in 2025:
Your child can enter university if they have Christian Education New Zealand (CENZ) Level 3 certificate or CENZ Level 3 certificate with Honours.
Your child can enter university if they have an Accelerated Christian Education Certificate of Achievement and High School Advanced Certificate Level 3 or Certificate Level 3 with Honours.
Your child can sit Cambridge International exams at approved schools in October to November as a private candidate.
Your child does not need to be immunised to attend an early learning service. If they are immunised, the service will ask you to provide your child's immunisation record.
Your child is legally required to be at school every day, unless they are sick.
Your child is not eligible if they are enrolled at a private school or board at a residential specialist school.
Your child may also be able to sit NCEA assessments at a secondary school. You will need to contact the school directly and ask if they will be a 'link school'. There is no obligation for a school to be a link school.
Your child may be able to sit some National Certificate of Educational Achievement (NCEA) assessments.
Your child will learn through play and active exploration. This is supported by the early learning curriculum,
Your child's birth certificate. If a parent has changed their name from the one listed on the child birth's certificate, provide a copy of the marriage certificate or name change certificate.
Your child's education is free between the ages of 5 and 19 at state schools if they are a New Zealand citizen or a permanent resident.
Your early learning service can never require you to pay a donation.
Your early learning service may need to share personal information with other agencies, such as the Police, to protect children.
Your education advisor can provide you with advice about how to undertake a review. However you decide to undertake a review, the following big picture questions are important:
Your education and care service will receive funding if you meet all of the requirements in the ECE Funding Handbook.
Your hazard and risk management system are likely to be made up of 2 main processes:
Your hazard and risk management system are likely to be made up of 3 main processes:
Your hazard and risk management system is likely to be made up of 2 main processes:
Your hazard and risk management system is likely to be made up of 3 main processes:
Your home education application will be considered by the regional office.
Your home-based ECE service is funded at the home-based quality funding rate, you must:
Your most recent funding roll can be found on
Your onboarding or role change process should consider what access and permissions are required when a new staff member starts. A template is provided below.
Your options will depend on your eligibility. Most people will only be eligible for our full claims assessment process.
Your personal information will not be disclosed to any third party except as authorised under the Privacy Act 2020 or other Act of Parliament.
Your playgroup curriculum will be based on the 4 principles of
Your playgroup will need to develop a system to make sure enrolment and attendance records are maintained and reviewed.
Your policy must be reviewed at least every 3 years.
Your policy should be developed in conjunction with your community so there is a shared understanding of what actions a service may take. Your agreed process should be included in a parent information pack.
Your policy should cover:
Your property advisor has this role.
Your referrer must be one of the following:
Your regional office can help with developing your planning and reporting documents.
Your request is for a large quantity of information.
Your rights and responsibilities
Your school board must publish the annual report on your website. We recommend that you publish the annual report at the same time as you submit it to us.
Your school is responsible for doing a safety check on children's workers. This includes a risk assessment for registered teachers who have been Police vetted as part of their Teaching Council certification.
Your school is responsible for making sure the teaching staff you employ are Police vetted by the Teaching Council.
Your school may have a code of conduct that you and your child must sign up to before using the school bus.
Your school might also connect you with other agencies or alternative education pathways.
Your school must apply for approval before you start an exchange programme with an overseas partner school.
Your school must be a signatory to the Education (Pastoral Care of Tertiary and International Learners) Code of Practice 2021 (the Code).
Your school must have a child protection policy. The school board is responsible for creating and maintaining the policy.
Your school policies and procedures should clearly indicate requirements about Police vetting volunteers while acknowledging that volunteers do not need to be Police vetted by law.
Your school will also have policies and procedures for using information in the Police vet to support employment decisions. These should be reviewed regularly so they align with the Act and our guidelines.
Your school will contact you if your child is absent from school.
Your school will work with you to remove barriers to attending. There are many kinds of support available that might help make it easier for your child to come to school.
Your school's roll may grow beyond what you are funded for. If this is the case, you can apply to us for funding in November, when your school roll is unlikely to grow much further.
Your service can attest to or confirm what you are paying your certificated teachers when you submit your RS7 return. Completing the attestation means identifying that your service has met all the funding conditions for that salary scale.
Your service is responsible for confirming that a full safety check has been done. This is set out in our criteria:
Your service may claim up to 6 hours per day and 30 hours per week of funding per child.
Your service may have their advance funding withheld if:
Your service must have a written child protection policy.
Your service should now be collating more in-depth documentation on how you have regard for the NELP relevant to your early learning service in consultation with your parents/
Your service will complete an attestation 3 times a year for the March, July and November funding rounds to confirm what you are paying certificated teachers. Attestation periods are:
Your service will need to keep records showing how you have worked out the pay of teachers and evidence of salary progression.
Your service will receive a wash-up payment if it is due.
Your service's isolation index
Your tertiary education organisation may also have scholarships. This information may be on their website, or through a scholarships office on campus.
Zero Data is available to anyone using a mobile device connected to the Spark, Skinny, One NZ, 2degrees, Warehouse Mobile, Slingshot or Orcon mobile networks.
[PDF, 81 KB] if you are currently a KiwiSaver member.
] for thriving Pacific Languages to build a prosperous Aotearoa and the key objectives to strengthen pathways and resources for learning Pacific languages and learning in Pacific languages.
a Level 3 ECE qualification completed before 1 June 2022
a Level 4 or higher ECE qualification listed on the New Zealand Qualifications Framework or
a NZ ECE or primary teaching qualification and a current practising certificate, or
a Staff Record (that has recorded the actual hours worked by all regulated (ratio) staff) for every day the service is operating
a bank verification stamp on the RS3 form or
a bed permanently set up in a convenient place, such as the office (this option can double as an area for isolating sick children as well)
a board member (this cannot be the same person as the procurement sponsor).
a brief description of what the funding was spent on
a brief outline of the reasons for spending the equity funding in that way.
a change in a teachers employed hours of work that affects the overall Pacific language immersion and bilingual level of the service
a charitable, statutory, or community trust
a child attends for fewer days per week than they are enrolled to attend, for more than half of the weeks in the month.
a child has attended fewer hours than they were enrolled to attend, for more than half of their enrolled days in the month or
a collection of different textured items for children to touch, taste and feel. Ensure items are non-poisonous and larger than a ping-pong ball to avoid choking.
a comfortable couch that is used for other purposes at other times
a completed EC13 (Medical Reasons for Exemption to Use Early Childhood Absence Rule for Children with Special Health Needs) or
a contact name and phone number.
a copy of the attendance records for every child who attended your service in the previous 4 months
a copy of the attendance records for every child who received 20 Hours ECE at your service in the previous 4 months
a copy of the compliance schedule if 12 months have not elapsed since the compliance schedule was first issued.
a copy of the current Annual Building Warrant of Fitness; or
a copy of the current practising certificate of each certificated
a copy of the current practising certificate of each certificated teacher
a copy of the current practising certificate of each certificated teacher (either the digital certificate, Teaching Council approval email, or a copy of the online register showing name and expiry date)
a copy of the enrolment records for every child who attended your service in the previous 4 months
a copy of the enrolment records including 20 Hours ECE attestation for every child who received 20 Hours ECE at your service in the previous 4 months
a copy of the notification that has been signed by the parent, or
a cosy quiet area, use pillows, curtains and soft toys
a current practising certificate.
a dated signature of at least one parent/guardian to attest to the accuracy of the enrolment record.
a definition of a specified
a definition of serious misconduct and
a definition of serious misconduct; and
a financial payment (amounts vary depending on the decade you attended
a financial payment of $10,000 to settle your claim
a foundation or society for example Asthma and Respiratory Foundation NZ.
a foundation or society, for example Asthma and Respiratory Foundation NZ.
a handout for parents containing relevant information, or
a head or senior teacher in a kindergarten
a justified absence because we saw the value in
a justified, a JA justified absence.
a learning support need/disability
a level 5, or above, qualification developed by
a look at potentially for, I think that's due
a masters degree of teaching or
a means of cooking and/or heating food
a means of hygienically washing dishes
a member of the community or
a member of the family or the community
a member of the management team or board or
a modern look and feel with a, with simplistic easy
a notice on the wall of the service.
a number of schools, and I suspect probably most
a particular staff member
a payment to help you with the costs of getting your child to and from school.
a presence, then they could do that.
a primary school prior to 1989
a primary teaching qualification
a procedure people should follow if they wish to complain about non-compliance with the Regulations or criteria.
a process for providing formal and informal opportunities for parents to:
a process for providing positive guidance to encourage social competence in children (C10)
a process for reviewing the positive guidance provided by the group.
a public awareness campaign on the importance of school attendance
a qualified certificated teacher employed in a management position in a licensed early childhood centre.
a qualified certificated teacher employed in a teaching role 51-80% of the time or 81-100% of the time Pacific immersion or bilingual environment within a New Zealand state or state integrated school, or
a qualified certificated teacher in a teaching role or management position in a licensed Pacific immersion or bilingual early childhood services within New Zealand.
a range of equipment and resources that invite exploration, stimulate thinking, include the familiar and the unfamiliar, and reflect the dual cultural heritage of
a range of picture puzzles to suit different ages, from simple 1-piece puzzles with knobs to the more complex
a range of utensils, for example, rolling pins, shape cutters, garlic press, pots and pans, durable plastic cutlery and scales.
a record of enrolment that shows their course start date and the date they complete their qualification.
a record of information and guidance sought from agencies and/or services (C13).
a risk-management appraisal of any issues identified.
a school board member (this cannot be the same person as the procurement sponsor).
a school decision and school level.
a selection of buckets, spades, shovels, rakes
a selection of dancing accessories, for example scarves, bell wrist bands, streamers,
a selection of musical instruments, for example drums, bells, tambourines, shakers, maracas, clappers, cymbals, wood blocks
a selection of natural materials.
a selection of paper, cardboard and natural materials for painting on
a sink connected to a hot water supply
a specialist school before 1989
a specific teaching practice
a state-integrated school with a special character that is
a statement of accounting policies
a statement of financial position (balance sheet)
a statement of movements in equity
a statutory agency such as the Police.
a strengthened focus on Pacific bilingual and immersion education and Pacific languages in education through a change to key shift 1
a stretcher or mattress that can be pulled out and set up as required in a quiet area of the service.
a student has been absent without an explanation and
a subject or specialist level 7 qualification on the NZQF (i.e. not an initial teacher education qualification) which can be a Diploma (excluding a National Diploma), Graduate Diploma or Degree or
a subject or specialist level 8 qualification on the NZQF which can be an honours degree or a Post Graduate Diploma or
a subject or specialist level 9 qualification on the NZQF - masters or doctorate or
a supervision plan approved by Playcentre Aotearoa and
a supervision plan specific to the excursion is developed and implemented
a system of regular appraisal
a technical expert (such as an architect)
a technical expert such as an architect
a trained early childhood teacher in a teaching capacity in a licensed early childhood centre or the Early Childhood Service of Te Aho o Te Kura Pounamu (Te Kura)
a variety of play opportunities to encourage learning
a warm, safe, secure, predictable, interesting and stimulating environment
a whiteboard/ blackboard recording information for that session or day of operation.
aa. the service has regard to any statement of National Education and Learning Priorities; and
ability of staff to assess, plan and evaluate if space is shared with others
about any planned reviews and consultation.
about the accident or incident as soon as possible. This must be no longer than 48 hours after the accident or incident.
about the service in general.
about what transport options are available. They can tell you about any help your child may be able to get, or if there is public transport they can use.
access to a free school bus service
accessing resources and guidance to start using Phonics Checks and Hihira Weteoro.
accessories for shop, office, medical play and so on.
accessories such as hats, scarves, belts, bags, shoes
accessories, for example, bottle tops, pieces of leather, fabric, card, vinyl, PVA glue, paint, rubber bands, cotton reels, natural materials.
accommodate at least the requirements of criterion PF36, when arranged in accordance with criterion HS10.
accommodate at least the requirements of criterion PF38, when arranged in accordance with criterion HS10.
achievement and attendance data
acknowledge in writing that they have received the conditions of transportation.
acknowledge the complaint or incident report within 2 working days
acknowledge the source and copyright status of the material.
acoustic absorption materials, if necessary, to reduce noise levels that may negatively affect children's learning or wellbeing.
acoustic fencing and plantings.
across the country. Of these, 18,023 (9%) were learning in Level 1 education. In 2021, 16,750
actionable insights to improve student attendance.
actions taken and by whom and
actions taken and by whom; and
acts as the understanding between
add in notes to support this.
adding classrooms for roll growth
additional drained and ventilated wall cavity requirements
additional staff beyond the minimum regulated adult/child ratios
address and contact number
adequate information is made available to parents of enrolled children and, where appropriate, to the families or
adequately separated from areas of the service used for play or food preparation to prevent the spread of infection.
administering legislative and regulatory controls
administers the process for managing complaints about teachers.
administration of 20 Hours ECE
administrative and office staff
administrative information technology (IT) work, such as managing other users, changing configurations, or creating or deleting resources.
adult cups, teaspoons and so on
adults at the service have the necessary skills, knowledge and experience to deal with emergency situations
adults can easily find the necessary provisions for administering first aid; and
adults have clear access to at least one side (meaning the length, not the width)
adults providing education and care
advisers on Deaf children
after 3 weeks of continuous absence (see Section 6-5 for further details on the 3 Week Rule).
aged between 2 and 6 years who can't attend an early learning service or
align cancellation powers of competence/disciplinary bodies
align the powers of competence/disciplinary bodies in regard to conditions that are imposed on practising certificates and LATs for specified periods
all coordinators and educators in home-based services
all educators' qualifications, or
all information provided during the safety check and
all information provided during the safety check, and
all kitchen laundry (dish cloths, tea towels, hand towels, oven mitts and so on)
all licensed ECEs receive an ECE funding subsidy for up to 30 hours a week (the 30 hours includes any 20 hours of ECE funding being used)
all other staff who have regular contact with children
all parents and educators that will be associated with the reconstituted service are provided with accurate contact information for the rostered persons responsible at least 2 weeks before the service starts operating
all parents, educators, and persons responsible associated with the affected services are given 2-week notice of the change taking place
all private vehicles must have the appropriate safety restraints for adults and children in accordance with the NZ Transport Agency regulations.
all reasonable steps are taken to provide staff employed or engaged in the service with adequate professional support, professional development opportunities, and resources.
all service providers, service owners, managers, head teachers and persons responsible
all students will be learning literacy and mathematics in a way that evidence tells us best supports students to learn
all students working in your service as part of their educational or vocational training, including school students
all teachers, including relief teachers (independent or from an agency)
all the experiences, activities, events and routines that happen
all-day services face higher costs than sessional services because they must meet different ratio requirements
allow adequate supervision; and
allow adults to easily get children out in the case of an emergency evacuation (HS4).
allow adults to easily get children out in the case of an emergency evacuation (HS7).
allow children, who are able to, sit or stand safely when they wake (HS10)
allow children, who are able to, sit or stand safely when they wake (HS9)
allow disciplinary bodies to impose conditions on subsequent practicing certificates or LATs
allow enough time to produce high quality draft financial statements
allow for additional staff time with children and their
allow the Complaints Assessment Committee to refer a matter back to the Teaching Council.
allow the Teaching Council to annotate the public register of teachers or list of LATs for additional reasons
allowance application understands what attestation conditions their service has met prior to submitting the application.
allowance must keep the following documentation:
allowance serves to support
allowance will not be paid.
allowance, an employed certificated
allows children to make choices and be involved in planning and problem solving
allows children to play individually, in groups and with others
allows for easy cleaning (or is disposable) and
allows for easy cleaning (or is disposable); and
allows the Minister to issue a statement of National Education and Learning Priorities (NELP)
allows young children the freedom to explore and play in an environment designed especially for them
along with the PDF and approval from the Board.
also have the opportunity to learn more about parenting, develop social and community networks and build greater confidence.
also refers the action, strategies, and practical application of uplifting te reo and maintaining a
alterations to the outside of an existing building, like a roof or wall cladding.
amending it if necessary.
amending school board objectives to better align with Government priorities, including making educational achievement the paramount objective for school boards, while retaining the other objectives as essential supporting objectives
amount allocated over the forecast period
an Individual Development Plan (IDP) issued within the previous six months by the Ministry of Education Learning Support team or an alternative accredited early childhood special education provider or
an acceptable reason for being absent.
an allowance to contribute towards the cost of travel to school or the nearest bus pick-up or drop-off, or
an apology from the Secretary for Education
an early childhood qualification recognised by the Teaching Council of Aotearoa New Zealand for registration purposes
an early learning qualification
an early learning teacher has been convicted of an offence punishable by imprisonment for 3 months or more
an email from the parent confirming that they have been notified.
an extension to teach has been received
an honours degree of teaching or
an online training session
an outline of the amount received under each component of equity funding
an overseas qualification assessed by NZQA as comparable to a NZ ECE or primary teaching qualification and a current practising certificate, or
an overview of the reasons given for absence
and All-Day Kindergartens
and C, there seems to still be a little bit
and E code will be up to, um, school boards
and I appreciate that a lot
and I guess it really will go back to that,
and I have been leading the redesign
and I know Minister Seymours
and I suspect there will be a variety of questions
and I'm attending a, um, a doctor's
and Jared in that order could please introduce themselves.
and The New Zealand Curriculum, to support
and Training Act 2020, which, um, enables
and a t are all unjustified absences anyway.
and absence, then we can get into
and administration staff that we spoke to felt that, uh,
and advice, uh, for Nelson Mob West Coast,
and also a, um, also the Ang Iwi leaders group.
and any court orders affecting day-to-day care of, or contact with, the child.
and are they likely to have it all ready and up
and as the stewards of the
and best practice would be, uh, to be following up with the,
and board approved offsite learning, including courses,
and communities to achieve those goals across the learner pathway.
and community are encouraged to participate in and contribute to the curriculum.
and community is supported; when their parents and
and community, and reflect these in practice.
and concise feel for, for what these codes actually are.
and conducted in ways that uphold the principles of
and educators and coordinators?
and exercising around what schools deemed
and feedback from the sector have consistently
and feel free to step in here, Jared.
and for future generations.
and for the best of this individual student.
and for, um, so special character schools in terms
and forget, don't want you to spend any more time
and full participation of
and g the holiday during term time, all of those are unex,
and get a copy of the score bulletin.
and had an opportunity to, to simply say to them,
and how the service has regard for the statement of National Education and Learning Priorities (NELP) in its operation.
and how to get in contact with the ministry, um,
and include knowledge and perspectives of
and international competitions surely justified?
and is on a, uh, interim attendance code website.
and it enables proactive conversations with parents.
and it's a part of, it's a, you know, it is a, it's a form
and it's individual practice in case by case with students,
and it's not included in regular attendance data.
and just supporting Mark today.
and learner, or education workforce information from schools and
and make sure that the guidance that we provide is clear.
and may be about a range of topics including:
and my role today is to support Mark with this.
and noting that it's hit 8 54.
and now that that functionality no longer exists
and now you can see what the codes are.
and other support people with you to this meeting.
and out this, uh, around schools needing
and parents to understand and respond to the learning and development needs of
and please do not be a stranger.
and policies and procedures.
and professional development for staff.
and report attendance every day, we thought, you know what,
and report daily attendance
and scenarios arise, uh, there is always the opportunity
and service leaders have a responsibility to engage in responsive and respectful relationships with children, parents and
and service providers more information, advice, and guidance to support implementation of the licensing criteria.
and sets out the ways in which the principles and strands of the curriculum can be put into practice in each
and some other work streams, uh, around star,
and something that came up a lot with, um,
and state integrated schools will be required to record
and students taking part in it, um, alongside whanau
and teachers to thrive in environments that support their success.
and that is where all information about the revised
and that it is heard, seen and used throughout the day, integrated throughout the service curriculum.
and that will be reflected in the attendance code decision
and that will be some new terminology.
and the Ministry of Education have produced an Emergency management plan template that can be used for planning for a variety of emergencies.
and the Secretary for Education.
and the aconga, then you would be having a conversation
and the board, if they're an isolated community,
and the changes to the revised attendance codes, um,
and the codes, um, up to speed for something
and the example L equals late or left early?
and the importance of these concepts in the development of relationships?
and the learning that goes, that goes alongside it.
and the overall Education Work Programme.
and the wider community. An environment that is safe, respectful, and welcoming will encourage
and their curriculum guidance is provided by
and their suitability to work with
and then absent in the afternoon.
and then record that they've left early.
and then the absence codes broken down into justified
and then the, uh, so the presence codes,
and then you can see what they've been merged to.
and this is just regarding the question mark,
and this will come clearer on in a couple of slides,
and to ensure the survival of
and to work with parents and
and unjustified absence categories.
and want it to be as simplistic as possible.
and want to consider a rapid payment, download the information sheet from the key documents and find out more about the
and we are looking forward to having, um,
and we have merged them into existing present justified
and we spoke to a number of schools.
and we'll click into the next slide, is a series of
and we've just slightly relabeled the question mark.
and what the follow up is.
and your playgroup philosophy statement) and decide on an aspect that you want to review.
and, uh, their presentation and their responses.
and, um, despite, uh, reasons A, B,
answering the following question:
any aggravating or mitigating factors.
any agreed actions decided between all agencies involved.
any court orders affecting day-to-day care of, or contact with, the child.
any cultural or family considerations
any emergency that requires the school to close.
any fees charged by the service
any infectious or contagious disease or condition.
any logos, emblems and trademarks on the website
any medical information about your child such as allergies, medication and medical conditions.
any medicines your child requires.
any other home nominated by a parent of the children.
any physical or mental condition that could be dangerous (for example, strange or disturbing behaviour, or aggression)
any planned reviews and consultation and
any planned reviews and consultation.
any previous relevant work experience
any service recognised for salary purposes, and
any state school that is now closed (including specialist schools and health camp schools), and
appropriate and secure storage for early childhood education curriculum support materials and records.
appropriate curriculum implementation by the service provider and
appropriate curriculum implementation by the service provider; and
appropriate documentation and records are:
appropriate positive guidance strategies which use praise and encouragement and give the child respect and dignity
appropriate written procedures and records are developed, maintained, and made available when appropriate.
are a central part of everyday learning and sharing as a group is an important way of teaching.
are a crucial part of quality early childhood education. Parental presence and engagement have been found to support improved outcomes for children and develop a greater sense of belonging for
are also eligible to receive Equity Funding and the Annual Top-up for Isolated Services (ATIS) from the Ministry of Education.
are also supported to undertake training in
are checked for warmth, breathing, and general wellbeing at least every 10 to 15 minutes (during day-time sleep), or more frequently according to individual needs.
are checked for warmth, breathing, and general wellbeing at least every 5 to 10 minutes, or more frequently according to individual needs.
are companion strategies and should be read in conjunction with each other.
are competent and confident learners who are active participants in their own learning, regardless of their age, gender, ethnicity, and abilities.
are consistent with any prescribed curriculum framework that applies, and
are currently chartered to
are early learning services which promote
are eligible to receive the ECE Funding Subsidy (
are eligible to receive their allowance while on paid leave for their usual days worked.
are encouraged to engage with different forms of expression in ways that they find meaningful and enjoyable.
are heard, listened to, and enacted in our setting?
are mindful of all learners when planning social, sensory, and physical environments. They are intentional and deliberate when selecting resources, teaching strategies, and learning experiences based on knowledge of the child and the local context.
are more expensive to purchase
are open continuously for at least one session of 2.5 hours per week and
are playgroups that provide learning in and through
are relatively cheap (compared to commercial)
are required to develop and adopt a freedom of expression statement that sets out their approach to freedom of expression and is consistent with clear statutory expectations
are required to prepare a
are required to publicly report on academic freedom and freedom of expression in their annual reports and to maintain complaints mechanisms.
are responsible for providing a safe and bullying-free learning environment for all students. This includes preventing and responding to bullying.
are reviewed by the group and amended as necessary at least every 12 months.
are sayings that have many meanings rather than direct translations. They should be read in this light.
are the experts on their children. In what ways do you partner with parents and
are the responsibility of the whole
are the teaching qualification recognised by the Trust Board for
around a 39 school staff from 37 schools all across the
around getting the bus and things like that.
around requesting medical certificates
around those unjustified absences.
around, um, around presence
around, um, what that guidance is gonna be.
around, you know, what's sort of in scope and outer scope.
arrival and departure times and
as X up until the day that school has finished.
as a D but the ones that aren't would be a form
as a basis for weaving with children, and parents and
as a moment in time, so if present in class
as a removing them from the role.
as a separate written notice given to parents, or
as a student can still make up to four hours of,
as an email to the parents
as on a case by case basis.
as part of a parent induction pack
as part of their normal programmes.
as question mark for the everyday matter reports.
as they build authentic and reciprocal relationships that support positive transitions for children in, through and from the service.
as to their competency in
as well as we go through this.
asking open-ended questions of the children when guiding their learning
asking other local schools if they have worked with the supplier and for their opinions.
aspects of provision that are not required by regulation
aspects of provision that are required by legislation
aspirations, and how are these shared so that all
aspirations, and how are these shared so that educators and coordinators understand and use them?
assess risk on children's education, health, safety and wellbeing
assess the likelihood and impact of identified risks
assess, plan and evaluate.
assess, plan, and evaluate.
assessment and management of risk
assessment and management of risk is undertaken
assessment and management of risk is undertaken, and adult:child ratios are determined accordingly. Ratios are not less than the required adult:child ratio
assessment and management of risk; and
assist in meeting the additional costs of service delivery.
assist students, where required, in and out of the vehicle and fasten their seat belt and any other personal positioning devices
assistance for students with complex safety or mobility needs.
at a child-sized table inside or outside
at a dining room or kitchen table
at a school level, um, around
at a secondary school, um, for the climate strikes.
at any reasonable time on request by a parent of a child enrolled in the service; and
at any reasonable time on request by a parent or member of the family or caregiver of a child attending the playgroup:
at any time on request by any person exercising powers or carrying out functions under Part 2 of the Act.
at any time on request by any person exercising powers or carrying out functions under Part 2 of the Act; and
at least 1 person on each session who holds a qualification gazetted as meeting the Person Responsible requirements for Playcentres.
at least a full term's notice of the change.
at services receiving quality funding rates
at tables in the main activity area
at the end of the day, recording actual hours worked by regulated (ratio) staff (make sure you keep a copy of the roster or schedule to support this) or
at the right time (follow any instructions provided by parents or medical staff about this).
at the time of enrolment. The guidance may be provided in hard copy, electronically or via an electronic link for
at the time of enrolment. The guidance may be provided in hard copy, electronically, or via an electronic link for
attaching a document printed on bank letterhead, with the bank account number visible, to the RS3 form.
attaching a pre-printed bank deposit slip to the RS3 form or
attendance codes will be housed.
attendance information that has been entered into the SMS incorrectly
attendance patterns in your school
attendance registers that have been marked by staff on a twice daily basis (or once a day for services that operate only one session).
attendance registers to help work out where the absence rules need to be applied.
attended when they did not attend.
attending the school day.
autofill your passwords into websites for you
automated transfer from student management systems
available for the exclusive use of the service during hours of operation.
available for use by other groups in the community; but
avoid reversing as much as possible
avoids limiting children based on their gender or ability
bacteria, such as salmonella and campylobacter
balls in a range of sizes, ropes, hula hoops
base management staffing for secondary, area and composite schools
based on that special character or,
baskets for carrying things.
batting/grasping/kicking, use scarves, toys that roll and mobiles
be aged between 5 and 21 years
be big enough for large-muscle activities such as running and jumping.
be designed to eliminate head or limb entrapments
be enrolled at their nearest state or state-integrated school that meets their special education needs
be enrolled at their nearest state or state-integrated school that meets their special education needs.
be interacting with an adult providing education and care or
be involved in decision making concerning
be involved in decision-making concerning their child's learning (C12); and
be large enough to allow all children to lie flat on their backs
be licensed to carry passengers (they have a 'passenger endorsement')
be more interested and so they are more likely to be involved in their own learning
be non-sexist and inclusive
be of a height and design that prevents children climbing over. Young children can commonly scale a fence that is less than 1.2m high, so this would be a minimum
be of a height and design to prevent children from climbing over or through
be organised, equipped and managed on a co-operative basis, and
be present to assist in the loading and unloading of students into or out of a SESTA vehicle
be relevant and challenging for the range of ages and abilities of children attending.
be reviewed every 3 years.
be run according to the operating requirements set out in the Playcentre
be taking part in an activity initiated by an adult providing education and care or
be temporarily kept at a safe distance from other children (to prevent cross-infection)
be written down and in use
because I've had examples in the past where I've had
because it's an isolated community, so they, they have
because it's been putting pressure on the practitioners just
because of the importance of
because the queue for the board approved.
because the redesign of the codes is, uh, you know,
because there has been a change that was,
because there's no explanation.
because these services are very different from
been assessed as meeting the Teaching Council of Aotearoa New Zealand standards for certification.
been privy to all of this
before I manager for Nelson Mobile West Coast Week,
before we do that, I will put up the slide for
being employed for a 40-hour week, 2,080 hours a year. The allowance does not increase if certificated
better use of data, assessment, and evidence to identify and invest in supports and services that work.
between truant and explained, but not approved.
between truant and unex, um, and explained but not approved.
between truant and, um, and explained,
board and the different requirements for their plans
board approved offsite learning.
board, cloth and plastic books
boarding at residential schools, and need transport to and from home for the weekend or holidays
boards until July 2025. This applies to:
boards. It has information about the new requirements, a suggested process and example templates.
bodies of water (such as pools or water troughs).
body, spirit, energy, minds, hearts, compassion, tears,
books which show males and females in non-traditional roles
bookshelves or display case
brief description of the purpose to which the funding was applied (e.g. purchase of goods or services)
brief outline of the reasons for spending the funding in that way
brushes of different sizes, rollers, and other items for printing and painting
bubble-making shapes and mix
bucket with lid for storage
bug catchers or insect viewers
bus controllers at the schools serviced by the route
but I guess this is, this is, uh,
but I just wanna say thank you very much, um,
but I wouldn't want them to be disadvantaged.
but I, if it's a, if it's a parking issue, I, I believe,
but a list of examples that give greater effect to
but due to family organization have
but due to the family organization,
but happy, um, uh, to provide some guidance to your school,
but it's, it's not reported.
but my substantial role sits in Wellington.
but not approved, it's the same thing.
but not approved, or in other words, a unjustified absence.
but on balance, we, um, we didn't progress with that.
but only the presentation itself.
but out of class due to onsite school activity,
but recapping on this, we've got the present codes,
but the reason given, um,
but then also offsite school organized activity.
but then it's got an example of three days.
but there will be, um, if possible to do so.
but they are still there for the half day for two hours.
but this is where it's really important for schools to have,
but to also physically track where students are.
but we would only enforce that if we, um,
but when going to a daily reporting, does it have
but will reduce the fees you pay. When you fill out your enrolment form, you'll need to say which hours will be covered by 20 hours ECE. Talk to your early learning service about whether they offer 20 hours ECE, as some may not.
but yeah, I'd be, I'd be marking it as a T.
by a doctor or ambulance personnel in an emergency or
by a doctor or ambulance personnel in an emergency; or
by definition they can be 'in conflict' with each other and having both is an indicator of an environment 'fit for purpose', and
by doctor or ambulance personnel in an emergency or
by supporting us to examine the
by the end of the day, no.
by the parent of the child or
by the parent of the child; or
by what date the educator will have the qualification.
call your service manager or local office
called for the need to have a simplified set
can also be used to hygienically clean toys and playdough equipment
can apply for the school bus conveyance allowance on behalf of students using
can apply to us to use different term dates and opening times. Contact your regional office for support.
can be seen in what is provided, how it is provided, the way adults and children engage with each other and with the experiences, activities, events and routines that happen at playgroup.
can be separated out and measured.
can be supported by specialist services to develop an inclusive approach to the curriculum.
can be used by the service whenever they require it
can be used to allow children to explore attitudes and feelings
can handle a high volume of dishes
can meet the requirements of one of the quality options
can meet the requirements of the quality funding rate.
can no longer meet the requirements of any of the quality options
can occur. For instance, children's health and wellbeing can be promoted through the rituals and routines associated with food. Children can learn about their own and other cultures through interacting with a range of culturally diverse dolls, musical instruments, books and pictures; they can develop understandings about concepts such as size, shape and volume by experimenting with water and different sized containers.
can only pool Targeted Funding if each individual service agrees and provides written consent that details how much of their Targeted Funding entitlement they wish to pool.
can perform its function to the same level as if it were located on the premises
can provide a way of understanding review. The process of
can take to respond to the priorities.
cannot receive more than one full allowance entitlement.
care arrangement, where the Chief Executive Officer of
care provided by the service or due to the service being well regarded
carpet attached to the underside of tables.
carpet square or floor cushions
carpet square or table and chairs
carry out investigations where we believe there may be breaches.
casual bookings made for children who do not attend the service.
casual education and care services
casually enrolled children who do not attend.
centre-based services face higher facility costs than services that do not have to maintain a centre.
certified evidence of residency status
chair or sofa where adults can sit with young children
challenge our interpretations of anything? Is the process around this one of empowerment?
challenge our interpretations? Is this process one of empowerment?
change or revert permissions if access is needed for a fixed amount of time.
change the licence status to provisional
changes of role and responsibilities
changes. Where relevant, this could include establishing baseline information for where your students are at in relation to new curricula being implemented in 2025.
changing the year levels at a school
check a primary identification document
check a specified form of photographic identification
check all passengers are seated before departing (if seats are available)
check if a person's name has changed and, if so, get the required documentation
check its strength to ensure it is sturdy enough to cope with the weight of the children using it
check membership of any relevant professional organisation or licensing/registration authority
check mirrors before closing doors to make sure nobody is in the way
check that all safety checking has been appropriately completed for all existing staff
check that records are in place, collated and stored securely on file, and made available to us on request.
check the date each of these safety check components were completed.
check the nappy changing procedure and make sure that all staff are following it carefully
check. It is a free health and development check for your 4-year-old and helps give them a good start at school. At this check, the B4 School Check team will look at your child's growth and development and check your child can see and hear well.
checking that all appropriate notices were displayed
child has been absent on the same enrolled day or days of the week for more than half of these days in the month or
children able to sit or stand can do so safely as they wake.
children are familiar with, and confident in, responding to emergency procedures.
children are supervised and seated while eating (HS19 Supervision while eating, below) and
children are supervised and seated while eating (HS22, below), and
children cannot access any hazardous materials themselves.
children enrolled at school.
children enrolled in school
children who are present in the home but not enrolled in the home-based service or
children who become unwell while attending the service are kept at a safe distance from other children (to minimise the spread of infection) and returned to the care of a parent or other person authorised to collect the child without delay.
children's dignity and right to privacy is respected; and
children's independence can be fostered as appropriate
choice of where the animal(s) will be, for example visiting wards, individual rooms, or in public areas
choose Education Sector Logon, and finally select School Sector logon links.
choose their own learning activities at every opportunity by providing opportunities for positive social interactions and learning through relationships.
circuit board or collection of electrical components
circumstances where the technology will not be appropriate for example power cuts, child is unwell; and
civil defence emergencies.
clarify the role and expectations of employees
clarify the scope of the prosecution function of the Teaching Council relating to failures to make a mandatory report
cleaning agents, medicines, poisons and other hazardous materials
cleaning agents, medicines, poisons, and other hazardous materials
clear away pollutants and odours to improve air quality
clear records are kept that include:
clearly identify and include on the document their:
clicking on a link sent to your email address.
clothing items such as sun hats
cloths used for art and messy play
cloths used for art and messy play.
collaborate, relationships can strengthen. This will influence
collaborative process within the, uh, uh, timeframes allowed
collection of items for sorting by type, colour, size (natural materials such as stones, leaves, shells are good)
collection of natural materials to classify and investigate for example, shells, leaves, stones, feathers, bark
collects the student within an hour of school or
collects your child within an hour of school finishing
colours/numbers/shapes/size
combine random words together to make a passphrase
come to life through the interactions, responses and relationships that occur between children and children, children and adults, and adults and adults during playgroup.
communal decision-making practices
communicate in our setting?
communicate this out, but we are working at pace, uh,
communicate with adults providing education and care about their child, and share specific evidence of the child's learning and
communicate with adults providing education and care about their child, and share specific evidence of the child's learning; and
communicate with educators and coordinators, about their child, and share specific evidence of the child's learning and
communicate with parents and caregivers about safety and behaviour expectations.
communicate with the auditor at each step of the process
communication and social skills
communications in languages other than English.
complete enrolments and attendance records are submitted to the
complete the RS7 return in order to receive funding.
completed 2,080 hours work, and
complex learning support needs
complies with the requirements of Appendix 1
conditionally enrolled children who do not attend
conditionally enrolled children who do not attend the service
conflict of interest management plans
connected to the indoor activity space and can be easily and safely accessed by children
consider undertaking your own risk assessment for each staff member
considered a Public Benefit Entity under XRB requirements.
consolidated reporting, if your service is one which is grouped into a service provider (for funding purposes), or you are a licensee of more than one service.
constitutes unlawful use of imagery that violates copyright or breach of a licence agreement
consult the Minister before changing teaching standards or the requirements for practicing certificates
consult the Secretary of Education and consider their advice when it is performing its functions relating to standards for qualifications that lead to teacher registration and approval of teacher education programmes.
consult your community and develop a 3-year strategic plan outlining how the board will meet its primary objectives, as outlined in Section 127 of the Education and Training Act 2020
contact address (email or post)
contact each educator engaged in the service at least once per fortnight
contact numbers for people seeking information about the group.
contact your bank if you think your payment information might have been accessed.
contain provisions on the identification and reporting of neglect and abuse and
contain provisions on the identification and reporting of neglect and abuse, and
container to store this equipment (named and mouse proof).
containers for tea, coffee, milo, sugar
continues to provide the basis for consistent high quality curriculum delivery in the diverse range of early childhood services in
contracting a commercial laundry.
contractors and their employees before the person has, or is likely to have, unsupervised access to children.
contractors and their employees who may have unsupervised access to children during normal operating hours.
conveyance allowances to contribute to the cost of getting to school or
copies of ECE, Primary or overseas qualifications along with NZQA assessments of the overseas qualification for all certificated teachers
copies of qualifications and current practising certificates for certificated teachers
copies of the letter of registration with an ECE or primary endorsement from the New Zealand Teaching Council
copies of training records for parents/
copyrighted materials from other websites, or
costs such as fees or donations, and
could report to their board.
counseling appointments will be coded as D.
covered by an adhesive film designed to hold the glass in place in the event of it being broken; or
covered mattress for rolling and tumbling
cradle gym or hanging frame with interchangeable objects
create an annual implementation plan that sets annual targets and actions for working towards strategic goals
create ourselves or is there a
create strong random passwords or passphrases
creating and deleting resources.
cry easily, are irritable or in pain
currently lists some education and learning objectives for early learning, primary and secondary education.
curriculum ensures an environment rich in
curriculum is consistent with the prescribed curriculum framework that applies to
curriculum is inclusive and responsive to the
curriculum is informed by planning, implementation, and evaluation that demonstrates an understanding of
curriculum provides a range of indoor and outdoor experiences and opportunities in
curriculum respects and supports the right of
cutlery, vegetable knife/peeler
cutters (wire or fishing line)
daily staff activities, such as emails or browsing the internet
data errors such as missing student or attendance information
date and time medicine was administered and by whom and
date and time medicine was administered and by whom; and
date and time medicine was given and who administered it
date the transition arrangement began
days and times of actual attendance for each child
days and times of operation
deadlines and procedures for applications
decide how work is allocated or delegated
decide whether further action is required from us.
deciding if one is required
decision-making, management and responsibilities
decorations on walls, especially thick wall hangings and 3-dimensional decorations rather than flat pictures
define how suspected neglect and abuse will be identified and reported
defines learning outcomes for
delaying their morning routine
deliver the curriculum for children using the main language of communication.
deliverables and planned timeline
delivery against the achievement target is at-risk
departing staff and students.
describe how children (walking and non-walking) will be managed during an emergency drill
describe how children (walking and non-walking) will be managed during an emergency drill.
describes when and how to apply the Frequent Absence Rule.
designated character school with a character that is
designed and located to allow children capable of independent toileting to access them safely without adult help and
detail on each of the 3-yearly re-check components and how these are completed
detail on each of the safety check components for existing children's workers and how these are completed
detail on each of the safety check components for new children's workers and how these are completed
detail on how the risk assessment is undertaken, and what action is taken when risk is identified
detail the areas Targeted Funding must be spent within.
details of any chronic illness/condition that the child has, and of any implications or actions to be followed in relation to that illness/condition
details of how at least 1 parent (or someone nominated by them) can be contacted while the child attends the service
details of how at least 1 parent (or someone nominated by them) can be contacted while the child is participating in the service
details of the amount of funding received from the Ministry of Education
details of when first aid training is booked for.
determining standards for teacher registration and the issuing of practising certificates
develop appraisal processes and procedures
develop criteria for allocating resources
develop meaningful and reciprocal relationships with parents and
developed, maintained, and regularly reviewed; and
developing and consulting on it
developing social competence and understanding of appropriate behaviour.
direct feedback from the education sector and disability community
direct resourced bus services provided by schools
direct-resourced bus services provided by schools
discard any dropped food and
discipline/dismissal procedures.
discuss any significant issues with your property advisor.
display board for instruments
display school bus signs when students are on the bus
do not have access to food or liquids while in bed and
do not have access to food or liquids while in bed; and
document. In 2024, we have updated
documentation of discussions with families.
does not create hazards to children but is easily accessible to adults
does not have its own website, we can host your documents on our Education Counts website. Send a board-approved request to us.
does not have to meet the teacher certification criteria
does not need the student to be picked up before 7am and gets them to school or
does not need the student to change buses more than once on a journey.
does not need your child to be picked up before 7am and gets them to school on time
does not need your child to change buses more than once on a journey.
does not present a suffocation hazard to children.
dolls, dolls bed, bedding
don't sell or distribute any material on a commercial basis
don't use the material in a derogatory manner or a misleading context
donations, which you can choose to pay.
draw on their wide knowledge of each child to make meaning of their observations and plan for next steps.
dress up clothes, for example, doctor, police, fire-fighter, animal suits and other unisex costumes, ballet costumes, overalls, hard hats, cultural costumes and fabrics
drives the calculation of salary units, and middle management and senior management allowances.
drying rack or line and pegs
dune sand (this can be purchased by the sack from hardware shops and stored in a bucket).
during term time and truant.
each child is restrained as required by Land Transport legislation
each child is restrained as required by Land Transport legislation and
each child is restrained as required by the Land Transport legislation
each child is restrained as required by the Land Transport legislation;
each university will be required to develop and adopt a freedom of speech statement, setting out their approach to freedom of speech, consistent with clear expectations
early learning educators work with parents,
easily accessible and available to children
easily recognisable and readily accessible to adults and
eat from a lunchbox or plate
education and care services
education, across the country.
education.surveymonkey.com
effectively guarded by barriers which prevent a child striking or falling against the glass.
electrical sockets and appliances (particularly heaters)
email us using the email address for your area office below
emergency contact phone number
emergency information, such as school closures during bad weather
employed by and teaching in a licensed Puna Reo or Reo Rua Education and Care that receives
employed in split roles, only the hours they are employed engaging in duties and responsibilities in a teaching role should be counted as hours of work. Information on split roles can be found in section 3-B-2 Education and care services.
employment agreement guides and
enable children to experience natural settings (for example, wind, sky, sun, rain)
enable children to make choices about their learning
enable children to undertake activities that would generally not be allowed inside a home (for example, running, kicking a ball)
enabling information-sharing to support multi-agency attendance support
encapsulate those four codes.
enclosed by structures and/or fences and gates designed to ensure that children are not able to leave the premises without the knowledge of adults providing education and care
enclosed by structures and/or fences and gates that are maintained so that children cannot leave without an adult's help; and
encourage and support a variety of learning possibilities.
encourage play with others as toddlers become more social and
encourage written and spoken language
encouraged for all users of your school's Google or Microsoft accounts, except students.
encouraged for any accounts or systems that have personal information or access to financial information, or any critical school systems
encouraged to continue with their current assessment, aromatawai and reporting practices in 2025
encouraged to implement 20- and 40-week phonics checks or Hihira Weteoro for Year 1 students and share phonics data with us.
encourages children to be confident in their own culture and develop an understanding, and respect for, other cultures and
encourages children to be confident in their own culture and develop an understanding, and respect for, other cultures; and
encouraging attendance at early childhood services
engage specialist professionals
enhancing process for children and parents and
enrol their child at a registered school when they turn 6 years old
enrolled at a private school.
enrolled at or licensed places at 488
enrolled in Level 1 education across the country.
enrolment (see Section 3-A-1 for details).
ensure that all children under 2 and a half years of age are accompanied by a parent or caregiver.
ensure that appropriate procedures are in place to deal with fires, earthquakes, and other emergencies.
ensure that day-to-day health and safety risks and hazards are identified, and that appropriate steps are taken to address those risks or hazards when children attend
ensure that early childhood education and care service providers comply with licencing requirements and
ensure that staff are implementing any prescribed curriculum framework and know how to use it in providing education and care
ensure there is enough space for adults working in the area as well as the children
ensure they are not too hot or cold
ensure you have a written procedure in place that reflects your new service's governance and management
ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, the health and safety of children attending the playgroup; and
ensures services licensed exclusively for under 2-year-olds are not disadvantaged by having to provide more toilets than would be of use for under 2-year-olds.
ensuring education providers and students receive appropriate resourcing
equipment and material costs for the ongoing purchase of new equipment and consumable materials and
equipment and material costs for the ongoing purchase of new equipment and consumable materials; and
equipment to fill, pour and sieve, for example bottle funnels, cups, water/sand wheels, spoons and small spades
equivalent overseas qualifications assessed by the NZQA or an overseas qualification where NZQA has assessed that the qualification has level 7 (graduate) study in a subject or specialist area(s) i.e. any area of study that is not initial teacher education.
equivalent overseas qualifications assessed by the NZQA.
essentially brought the guidelines
establish clear procedures for monitoring income and expenditure.
establishing and maintaining the qualifications that lead to teacher registration.
establishing routines and expectations
ethnicity (including iwi affiliations as appropriate).
even though student does not have the appointment,
even though the student does not have the appointment,
everyday matters as you normally would.
evidence of a bank account in your name
evidence of ongoing routine maintenance inspection of structure/s and equipment for compliance with the following provisions of NZS 5828:2015:
evidence of parental acknowledgement.
evidence of parental acknowledgement. Related to clause 46 (1)(b) of standard.
evidence of parental knowledge of the incident.
evidence of parental permission and approval of adult:child ratios for regular excursions
evidence of parental permission and approval of adult:child ratios for special excursions; and
evidence of parental permission for regular excursions at the time of enrolment and
evidence of parental permission for special outings or excursions.
evidence of parental permission.
evidence of reasons for trained parents/
evidence that parents have been informed.
evidence that the procedure is regularly reviewed.
example templates for how a
examples is it could be a a n
exchange programme and policy
excludes teacher-led services.
excursions and entrance fees
excursions that do not meet the criteria for excursions and transport.
expectations, and our teaching practices will be strong indicators of what we consider as socially appropriate and competent behaviours.
experience stable and consistent relationships with
experiences a significant change in the number of eligible
experiencing hearing loss
experiencing tummy aches, headaches or feeling sick
explains the Frequent Absence Rule and
extensions and additions to an existing building
extreme weather conditions
fabric draped from the ceiling
fall zones (including free height fall provisions), and
falling from a height during a nappy change
feel more confident being involved in activities
fees for the hours your child attends
fibrous or stringy foods that are difficult for children to chew (for example, celery, rhubarb, raw pineapple)
fibrous or stringy foods that are difficult for children to chew (for example, celery, rhubarb, raw pineapple).
financial management processes
financial performance (profit and loss account) that includes specific reference to the funding received from the Ministry of Education
financial position (i.e. a balance sheet)
financial reports are not audited or do not meet the audit requirements. Refer to Section 12-4
finding it hard to talk about school in a positive way
firefighting equipment serviced and so on.
fitting safety glass in windows or doors that children can reach
five sessions or days per week
five sessions or days per week.
fixed-term contractors (i.e., if a contract of service is in place).
following guidelines set down by the Trust Board. The
following instructions for mixing formula (as different brands use different size scoops and volumes of water).
following instructions for the formula (as different brands use different size scoops and volumes of water).
following the completion of 2,080 hours of work, and
food preparation surfaces that are impervious to moisture and can be easily maintained in a hygienic condition.
foods with skins or leaves that are difficult to chew (for example, sausages, chicken, lettuce, nectarines)
for a period of at least 3 years; or
for a period of less than 3 years, but the lesser period of certification does not reflect problems identified with requirements relating to the hospital's premises and facilities that would affect children participating in the ECE service.
for a que as a question mark?
for absence for training for the sport also,
for absence has been ascertained.
for all periods the service is open.
for day one, term one next year.
for educators, learners and employers
for half an hour, then go home, what do we do?
for medical if they're absent for the day.
for meetings, attendance records and minutes could be considered as evidence
for particular hours of operation.
for pulling up, use towel rails attached to wall, steps and couches
for questions at the end of this session.
for regular excursions at the time of enrolment and
for some of these codes anyway.
for special excursions prior to the excursion taking place and
for staff who need admin access, create a separate account to their everyday account, and make sure it has a secure password and is 2-factor authentication (2FA) enabled
for the SMS providers that enable you to do so.
for the competition is the justified absence.
for the decode for those, uh, for those appointments.
for the doctor dentist appointment.
for the educator who was not available
for the latest updates and resources to support implementation in your schools and
for the next week and a half.
for the purposes of certification.
for the remainder of this year, please contact
for the ride, um, due to whatever reason, then um, the child
for the, uh, exam leave and the unsupervised exam study.
for their category of practising certificate, years of experience allowance progression may be deferred. For each
for two weeks prior to the competition?
for when a child is wagging or skipping class.
for when a medical certificate is required does need
for when a school requires a certificate,
for which order to address you.
for your attendance this morning.
for your child. All children have the right to attend their local school. We know that being around other
foreign materials (for example glass, animal droppings), equipment faults, vandalism, and dangerous objects
form, fraction and shape boards
forms of work experience, alternative education team,
forms submitted manually by education providers
freephone (NZ only): 0508 EDASSIST
from birth to school age.
from the early stages of establishment, through to being fully functioning. Contact your regional education advisor to talk about support options.
from the start of next year, we will be, uh,
functionality, um, I would encourage you
funding and staffing schools
funding conditions related to educator and persons responsible
funding conditions related to the attestation of certificated teacher salaries for education and care services
funding rate an education and care
funding rates for home-based ECE services
funding rates for parent/
funding' (ECE funding subsidy) quality funding rate requirement
funerals in the community
furniture or other items nearby that children are likely to climb onto that would bring them within reach of the glass.
games such as dominoes, picture lotto, patterning
gazette.education.govt.nz
general contributions towards the cost of high quality education and
generally take longer to run through a cycle of dishes
geometric and serrated puzzles
get a New Zealand Police vet
get familiar with the safety check requirements and our guidance
get the bank associated with the service to write in the new bank account details and sign and stamp the RS2 form or
get written consent from all schools nearer to the student's home than their chosen school allowing the transport provider to carry the student
give practical recognition of
gives the school board a base to make long-term decisions.
giving children positive feedback and showing real interest in their play
giving help to use resources correctly
glue (polycell and PVA), containers and brushes
good quality hand drill and bit, screws, screwdriver
governance, size, structure and staffing
great minds thinker like Tanya and you're not alone.
grouping are central to the philosophy of some centres.
guidelines for external and internal
had a pretty good starting point in terms of
had you in mind when we developed this, we wanted this to be
hand beaters, bowls, scrapers
hand towels (wash regularly).
happen in different environments and
has 3 outcomes and 3 audacious goals. These have been mapped onto the
has a current relationship with an overseas school
has a mattress covered in non-porous material, and
has a quiet area for stories, puzzles or similar and
has adequate breaks (for example, lunch)
has advice on looking after yourself and connecting with your child in ways that support their wellbeing.
has any staff or community connections with schools in other countries
has been assessed as not meeting the appropriate Teaching Council of
has been woven, and to evaluate our practice.
has important elements to ensure total immersion in
has information about how to apply for an exemption.
has information about making food safe for
has information about what children learn through the New Zealand Curriculum and
has more information about community engagement and consultation.
has plenty of safe and appropriate equipment
has time to plan for children's learning and curriculum delivery.
have a clear and justifiable purpose to close for instruction
have a duty to protect and promote academic freedom and freedom of expression
have a good choice of suitable activities
have a latching mechanism that is unreachable by children.
have a maximum adult:child ratio of 1:5, and
have a means of washing or wiping their hands.
have about their children?
have all SMS contributors, uh,
have an absence notification process
have an important role and responsibility in fostering, role modelling and supporting the peer-to-peer interactions of
have any horizontal railings or low posts located on the exterior of the fence
have diarrhoea or vomiting.
have different sets of requirements to meet. These options are unique to either playcentres or
have educator timesheets that show the hours worked and
have enrolment records for each child and
have mobility or safety needs that prevent them from travelling independently to school
have mobility or safety needs that prevent them from travelling independently to school.
have no interest in activities or play
have no more than 30 children attending, and
have passed a 'fit and proper person check'.
have some flexibility to decide when Term 1 starts, and when Term 4 finishes. Terms 2 and 3 are fixed.
have speech communication difficulty.
have to advertise if they have any places left for out-of-zone
haven't been too many changes.
having a family member or friend that works at a business your school might buy from
having a financial interest in a business your school might buy from.
having a separate fenced off exercise area where dogs can be removed to if necessary.
having a sheet parents can tick and sign when they have reviewed documents.
having barriers that prevent children from falling against glass surfaces
having previously worked for or with a business that your school might buy from
hazards present in kitchen or laundry facilities
health and safety legislation.
healthy options make up less than 75% of foods and drinks served.
help calculating parental leave for your staff.
help keep track of absences so that the absence rules can be applied and
help keep track of hours of attendance that can be claimed for children attending casually.
help remove excessive moisture in the air
help staff to train or upgrade their qualifications
helping children develop their interests through play
helping children make friends and socialise with other children and adults
helping their child put their ideas into practice without taking over
her attendance pattern returns to normal in October or
hessian (to work clay on)
hessian or old sheets for tunnels, houses
highest roll that you supply to us in your application form.
his attendance pattern returned to normal in March or
his attendance pattern returns to normal in December or
his enrolment agreement is reconfirmed or changed.
hold sensitive information and may raise privacy concerns.
holds a current First Aid qualification gained from a New Zealand Qualification Authority accredited first aid training provider or
holds a current first aid qualification gained from a New Zealand Qualification Authority accredited first aid training provider or
holds a current first aid qualification gained from a New Zealand Qualifications Authority accredited first aid training provider; or
honours the relationship with
hour may be claimed as Plus 10 ECE.
hours of employment for each certificated
hours of employment for each certificated teacher, and
how (method and dose) and
how (method and dose), and
how are maintenance issues communicated to the person responsible or governance committee for any repairs or replacement?
how comfortable/familiar they are with the procedure
how do we capture the last time, uh, in your EMS?
how do we, how are we supposed to deal
how food can be kept safe and hygienic while being consumed
how hazards and risks will be identified?
how information about costs will remain current.
how information will be shared between agencies and how the complainant's privacy will be protected
how is the maintenance of premises and equipment documented, managed and budgeted for?
how it fits with your internationalisation policy, if you have one
how many staff will be needed overall to ensure compliance with the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008 (schedule 1)
how often children eat at your centre each day
how outbound exchanges fit with your education outside of the classroom policy
how processes for updating the identification of hazards and risks on a regular basis will be updated?
how the ECE Funding Subsidy for education and care services is calculated
how the child is feeling and responding to becoming ill.
how the costs involved in providing early childhood education (ECE) are turned into funding rates
how the environment is set up
how the funding rates can be changed to reflect changes in costs, and
how the proportion of Certificated Teacher Hours is turned into a funding rate
how the supplier should break down their prices when they provide pricing information
how their identity was confirmed and
how their identity was confirmed, and
how their identity was first confirmed
how these were redesigned.
how they can be involved in the service
how to code absence due to students joining heco
how to decide if your service should provide general purpose financial statements or a special purpose financial report
how to keep track of Certificated Teacher Hours
how we came about this, uh, how we, you know, essentially
how we decide if a place in a vehicle is provided
how will the service better engage with their
how will visitors to the service be informed about identified hazards?
how you can interpret these codes.
how you will approach the market
how you will evaluate the proposals you receive from suppliers.
how you will fund the exchange programme.
however they were comfortable on balance, um,
https://conversation.education.govt.nz/conversations/action-plan-for-pacific-education/
https://tinyurl.com/2s3eas6c
https://tinyurl.com/3khzvd75
https://tinyurl.com/5xzysnv2
https://tinyurl.com/mtsvf33u]in
https://tinyurl.com/my757r7h
https://tinyurl.com/yvfbrx2n
https://www.education.govt.nz/our-work/overall-strategies-and-policies/action-plan-for-pacific-education/
https://www.education.govt.nz/our-work/overall-strategies-and-policies/the-statement-of-national-education-and-learning-priorities-nelp-and-the-tertiary-education-strategy-tes/
https://www.mpp.govt.nz/programmes/all-of-government-pacific-wellbeing-strategy/
https://www.mpp.govt.nz/programmes/pacific-languages-survey/
https://www.mpp.govt.nz/programmes/the-pacific-languages-strategy-2022-2032/
i. There is a direct cost associated with the excursion (e.g. an entry fee) and/or
identifies what is special about the service and
identifies what is special about the service, and
identifies what is special about the service; and
identify hazards and risks
identify issues that make attendance challenging for a student
identify priorities for expenditure
identify professional development needs and guide career developments.
identify the roles that they and others will play during an emergency drill.
identify the roles they and others will play during an emergency drill
identify, report, and respond to suspected or real cases of child abuse and neglect.
identifying students who may need additional support to participate in learning
identity, language and culture matter
if I do not make documents available for inspection or
if I do not provide documentation supporting the funding claim or
if I do not tell the Ministry of Education of changes that may affect funding claims or rates
if I have failed to answer all the questions in full or
if I have made a false statement or
if I'm the, lemme just read this correctly.
if a child has a toileting accident
if a child has had a toileting accident
if a child has vomited over themselves
if a child has vomited over themselves or another person
if a child has vomited over themselves or over another
if a hazard is identified, how it will be eliminated, isolated or minimised? When will it be done? Who is responsible for this?
if children become dirty during play.
if children become very dirty during play.
if children become wet or dirty during play.
if clearing tables for meals will impact upon the programme
if food is provided that is not prepared in accordance with the Ministry of Health guidance and the service does not consider it to be developmentally appropriate for that child.
if it is to be used by children, may be used by them in a manner that ensures their safety, supervision, and dignity can be assured.
if meals are scheduled or rolling
if one has an appointment, um, so for a,
if the area for infants is a separate room, think about how you will deploy staff across rooms to ensure adult:child ratios are maintained across the service.
if the parent/guardian chooses not to place their child in the care of the alternative caregiver/educator.
if there is demand from your current students
if you are here, but I'm very excited to outline to you
if you are sending documents out to parents, having a sheet parents can tick and sign when they have reviewed documents would also be a way of recording evidence
if you can connect to a school in a country where a language you teach is spoken
if you have any questions or comments about our social media accounts or these terms of use.
if you have the resources to maintain partner school relationships and support participating students
if you haven't had the opportunity, please do go back, um,
if you haven't seen that around following up on, um,
if you need further support.
if you require any support
if you were previously using an S for, you are now using,
ii. Travel is required to get to the destination, specifically any distance greater than what could be considered reasonable to reach by walking.
imagery to guide us through the process of review. Review is an important part of what we do together to generate growth through improvement. By pausing in our work and evaluating the effectiveness of our curriculum, we have opportunities to transform practice. Such is the nature of review.
immersion and bilingual education and care services to recognise, retain and attract certificated
immersion and bilingual education and care services.
immersion or bilingual early childhood service (including
immersion or bilingual environment within a New Zealand state or state integrated school (including
immersion or bilingual environment.
immersion or bilingual environment. This can include experience as a:
immersion or bilingual environments should be credited as half-service up to a maximum of 2 years' experience. This experience could have been paid or unpaid.
implementing structured teaching approaches
impose conditions for improvement.
improve staff:child ratios
improve staff:child ratios.
improve thermal comfort in warm weather by increasing air movement and removing heat.
in English-medium Schooling' by ERO gives a snapshot of the current provision of
in Level 1 education has increased since 2021. In 2023, there were 203,247 school aged
in a teaching role and management position in a
in accessing any changing area/table
in decisions around when nappies are changed.
in managing attendance. Email our training services team for an invite to the training:
in our decision making about what support may be needed and how to access this support?
in our service to lead and participate in events and customs of cultural significance?
in some Pacific communities.
in terms of what's changing,
in the Working together guide.
in the attendance code guidance in general.
in the enrolment form, or
in the free text field when you select a code,
in the ministry stance on this one.
in the revised code guidance around that.
in the time that they left.
in this document provide a way of considering review concepts from a
inaccessible to children.
inappropriate practices, such as inflicting physical or verbal punishment, isolating children, labelling children with derogatory words or shaming them
include early learning services, schools,
include information in their annual reports on how it considered any relevant statements of government policy.
include items typical and distinctive to outdoor settings (such as dirt, grass, sandpits, paddling pools and outdoor play equipment).
include quiet spaces, areas for physically active play, and space for a range of individual and group learning experiences appropriate to the number, ages, and abilities of children attending.
included as part of a parent induction pack
includes all previous experience as a certificated
includes licensed playcentres and licensed
including alternative provision.
increase language resources
increase professional development of staff
increase the range of experiences to challenge children or extend their learning?
increased cladding durability.
increased roof pitch (slope)
increases their years of service as outlined in the table above.
increasing the notification period unions must provide before undertaking strike action from 3 days to 7 days
indicators of performance and value for money
indoor/outdoor baby swing
induction procedures into the service
induction procedures into the services
inform our approach to new knowledge?
inform the driver, caregiver, transport service provider and us if there have been any changes or events that may impact on student behaviour.
information about any planned reviews and consultation.
information about how the service will respond to suspected child abuse and neglect.
information about our services and activities
information about the practices the service employs to keep children safe from abuse and neglect and
information about the practices the service employs to keep children safe from abuse and neglect; and
information about the workforce restriction and how this is/would be met
information about work history
information concerning their child
information from any relevant professional organisation or registration body
information on how the funding has been spent.
information on where to seek advice, if needed
information received/sought from relevant agencies or services.
informing policy, legislation change, and decision-making
infrastructure and service providers.
ingesting a cleaning product that wasn't stored securely
ingredients to make play materials for example cornflour, Lux flakes. Polycell paste
initiate your incident response plan
insightful trends and next steps
installing structured cabling
integrating wireless services.
interacting with other people in the home, including visitors and
interactions should provide encouragement, warmth, acceptance, and challenges to help children extend their ideas and understanding of the world.
interactions that occur between all the people in the group.
interlocking block sets for example, Duplo, Lego, Mega blocks.
internal appointment, temporary removal from class
interprets the curriculum broadly, taking it to include all the experiences, activities, and events, both direct and indirect, that occur within the early childhood setting.
interruptions to essential services
into all aspects of the service curriculum including routines, rituals and regular events.
into something else, the descriptions reflect that, right?
into the chat for those that aren't familiar with it.
introduce staff recruitment and retention initiatives
introduce themselves and explain why they are there
introducing a Stepped Attendance Response to guide school actions for each level of absence
introducing chants, rhymes, songs or music if appropriate, and helping the children to develop the language of social interaction, negotiation and inquiry.
investigating whether a local bus operator would consider running a commercial school bus service.
invitations to provide feedback on specific issues
involved in activities or routines (such as sleeping, eating and toileting) in separate parts of the home
involvement in providing education and care for children
ironing board, iron, brooms
is New Zealand's distance learning school that provides teaching and resources for your child.
is a basis for weaving with children and parents and
is a bicultural document and
is a cross-agency strategy for the education sector. The agencies include:
is a qualified ambulance officer or paramedic.
is a registered medical practitioner or nurse with a current practising certificate or
is a registered medical practitioner or nurse with a current practising certificate; or
is a serious injury or illness which occurred as a result of work activity and
is a strategy for all learners, while
is a strategy for all learners.
is a website that supports those teaching and learning
is above what is required to meet the regulated standards and
is accountability. This includes accountability to the Government.
is all we've done is we've really aligned it
is an online community for parents of disabled and medically fragile children. Parents can join
is any fundraising required?
is any major maintenance work required?
is as simple as if you were,
is assessed as meeting the applicable Teaching Council of
is available on our curriculum website
is both a noun and a verb, and in the context of the allowance, is interpreted as below:
is chosen will be considered the closest. This is to allow
is deemed offensive, abusive or obscene
is designed as a living document so we can progressively update it based on our ongoing conversations with
is easily recognisable and readily accessible to adults, and
is easily recognisable and readily accessible to adults; and
is education under the organisations included in
is eligible for this allowance.
is eligible to receive the pro-rata allowance for all hours connected to their employment in a teaching role or management position.
is employed part-time in a teaching or management role and part-time in another role, the certificated
is enhanced when culturally appropriate ways of communicating are used and when parents and
is enrolled when they are not enrolled or
is evident in everything that happens in our service. Consider the physical, temporal, and social environment (e.g., regular routines throughout the day, the way people interact with each other), and caregiving routines (e.g., for infants and toddlers). How do we articulate this?
is evident in everything that happens in our service. Consider the physical, temporal, and social environment (eg, regular routines throughout the day, the way people interact with each other) caregiving routines (eg, for infants and toddlers) how do we articulate this?
is for the education and care of the child and
is funded at the quality rate
is funded at the standard rate
is funded until the end of 2026.
is given to the right child (double-check the details on the label each time)
is in a town that has an active sister city relationship.
is inaccessible to children.
is intended to be the basis for decisions about the way the service is managed and about its direction in the future.
is involved in international learning opportunities which you can expand
is it is approved within the school policy.
is located close enough to the premises to ensure that people who need to use it can do so without difficulty, taking into account distance and comfort (such as not getting wet in bad weather), and
is maintaining alignment with government objectives
is making progress in relation to improving asset management.
is not in the toilet or nappy changing area.
is not working for too long each day and
is on extended leave without pay for their usual days worked, they cannot claim the allowance during this time.
is organised but challenging
is part of an international network of schools with similar values or philosophies
is produced and administered by the Trust.
is responsible for providing evidence, to the satisfaction of their employer, of any factors used to determine the length of service as a certificated
is responsible for providing evidence, to the satisfaction of their employer, of any factors used to determine the length of service as an uncertificated
is responsible for the registration and ongoing certification of teachers in New Zealand
is spoken, heard, and visible across the environment and used for a range of purposes.
is the cloak that warms the
is the pathway specifically for
is the responsibility of all
is the responsibility of all educators and coordinators in the education system.
is the same as in the previous month.
is the technique used across cultures to weave a
is their legal guardian, and where
is there regular opportunity for self-review, internal evaluation, and to set priorities for the year ahead?
is unreasonable (approximately 15kms).
is used for only 1 child.
is well set up so adults can interact with children and respond quickly to their needs.
issue a written direction
it does not comply with the regulations or licensing criteria
it enhances their learning, diverse strengths, and wellbeing. The service provider should consider how the organisation of staffing fosters opportunities for meaningful, positive, and consistent relationships between children and
it is compliant with the RFx process terms and conditions.
it is recommended by the chief executive of Oranga Tamariki.
it misses the reporting deadline
it no longer automatically switches, um, to a truant code,
it says example three days.
it would be an m uh, yes.
it would be queue as board approved,
it wouldn't, it would be a t marking as t it wouldn't matter
it'd be present in the morning
it's a school, um, process and practice area.
it's little Johnny's birthday today, we struggle with this.
it's not school organized, um,
items for floating and sinking (wood, stone, cork, shells, and so on)
items for matching for example, socks, shells, stones, leaves
items that parents may either provide for their own children, or pay for the service to provide.
its height from the floor (generally, anything below 80cm can be reached by young children)
its location in relation to the activity room
its own curriculum priorities of valued learning, taking into consideration the aspirations and learning priorities of
joining them and sharing in their play
joining your child in play.
journey times (one way) should preferably be no longer than 40 minutes and must not exceed an hour
just inquiring about whether there is a stated time that,
justified and unjustified absences
keep an attendance record for each enrolled student
keep attendance records to show the hours each child attended and
keep attendance records to show the hours each child attended plus
keep attendance records to show the hours each child attended.
keep evidence of attempts to contact trained relievers, for example email records and
keep evidence of the reason for the qualified staff members absence and
keep evidence to show that quality level adult:child ratios were met.
keep records for Christmas coverage when services have been reconstituted over the holiday period.
keep the dishes separate from each other while they are rinsed
keeping track of attendances by children who attend on a casual basis
keeping track of variations in attendance that might indicate a Frequent Absence (see section 6-7).
know they have a sense of belonging in this place?
lack of staff (except when this is due to a non-controllable health and safety issue)
lack of staff, including home-based educator absence (except when this is due to a non-controllable health and safety issue stemming from an infectious disease)
large bowl for mixing dough, finger paint
large cardboard or wooden boxes
launching an attendance dashboard and regular reporting of daily attendance figures so we all know the number of students attending each day and keep focused on increasing regular attendance
learn about the languages and cultures of all parents and
learning and development, and knowledge of
learning and the learning outcomes of
learning from home, then it would be an n If it is
learning support advisors
learning support request form
learning, their interests,
learning, understanding, love and soul.
leo o fanau moana bilingual.
leo o fanau moana immersion
lessens the likelihood of a prone or crawling infant, or a toddler just beginning to find their feet, being accidentally injured by an older child who is fully engaged in their own play and is not aware of their presence
let you know when they leave.
let's give them something that's, uh, hopefully said,
licence mergers or increases
licensed early childhood services
licensing criteria. Guidance is available upon request directly from
lie down comfortably; and
lighting (natural or artificial) that is appropriate to the activities offered or purpose of each room
like practice exams or mock exams.
like we don't really require a, you know,
limitations of their role.
limiting the number of children allowed outside at any one time
links to sites that may be obscene, abusive, offensive or indecent
local council information
location and design of playgrounds on site
location of eating areas in relation to hand washing facilities
look at the cleaning programme, including the cleaning of toys, bedding, equipment and frequently handled fixtures and fittings such as door handles, toilet flush buttons and taps and improve the programme if necessary.
look like can be found on the Teaching Council of
made available where appropriate:
magnets and a collection of items to test for magnetism
mailbox, and we can certainly help you through that process, but we will be letting you know that information as it comes out.
mainly focused on and involved in supervising quality environments for educators and children and
maintain good health and safety practices at the playgroup; and
maintained regularly; and
maintenance of technology and associated batteries
make all reasonable efforts to ensure that the service provider collaborates with the parents and, where appropriate, the family or
make and take calls while moving around the centre
make emergency calls from anywhere inside or outside the building.
make sure everyone is washing their hands thoroughly before eating and after using the toilet
make sure everyone is washing their hands thoroughly before eating and after using the toilet and the educator after changing nappies.
make sure that students have been toileted and is ready to be collected from the agreed pick-up point at the agreed time
make sure their child (including enrolled 5-year-olds) attends school every day the school is open until they are at least 16 years old.
makes all cultures feel welcome
making a water jug and individual cups available for children to pour their own water.
making sure all vehicles comply with
making sure education providers and students receive the right funding, resources, and support
making water jugs and individual cups available for children to pour their own water. These need to be cleaned daily.
manage inappropriate behaviour on the bus (in conjunction with the provider)
manage poor performance promptly
manages the systems for ensuring teachers are competent
managing any supervision issues for example is an extra adult in the car a good idea, so the driver can concentrate on driving, and children can make the most of the experience?
mandatory for all administrator and financial accounts
material on our social media pages that is protected by the copyright of a third party.
materials for mixing (for example oil and water)
maunga, awa, moana, whenua
may also have a teacher responsible for learning support who you can talk to.
may be a bit confused about or haven't seen before.
may be funded at another ECE service for up to 8 hours per week.
may choose to open or close.
may need to develop their practice.
may not be able to be used to clean toys and other equipment, because the water temperature is generally too hot.
means older children can enter the space freely to play and interact with their younger friends or siblings but do so consciously.
means older children can enter the space freely to play and interact with their younger friends or siblings, but do so consciously.
medical certificates or other Yeah.
meet all 20 Hours ECE funding rules.
meet privately with parents and colleagues
meet privately with parents and colleagues;
meet the minimum number of half days required under the regulations for the school year
meet the record keeping requirements for quality funding rates (see Section 3-C-2 for more details).
meet the teacher in person
meets the Australian/New Zealand Standard AS/NZS 2195:2010 (Folding cots)
member who is absent or a situation in a home-based education and care service funded at the quality rate when a coordinator is not available to replace the specified coordinator of the service.
member, then your service may meet the requirements for an alternative option for that day. Service management must document the reason why the option could not be met and keep evidence to show that the alternative option was met.)
middle management allowances for secondary and composite schools
might decide, um, that it's a j
minimise fluctuations in temperature, noise and lighting levels
ministry could retain that.
mirror (safety glass or filmed, fixed to wall)
modify circumstances where teachers can seek voluntary deregistration
monitor and document supplier performance and quality of delivery
monitor and review hazard and risk management system and practices.
monitoring and ensuring student enrolment and attendance
monitoring and ensuring student rights around enrolment and attendance
monitoring results across the New Zealand education system
more than half the children attending on any occasion have a parent or caregiver present in the same play area at the same time and
movable equipment (for example, planks, reels, boxes, ladders, tyres, tunnels)
move between them quickly in an emergency.
moves to a different boarding hostel or private board home
multiple unit blocks (plain wooden blocks cut to specific sizes)
must be closed, including public holidays, anniversary days and weekends
must be open, including the terms and school year length
must have a designated character under Section 204 of the Education and Training Act 2020 and provide a
must have particular regard to the NELP, including when developing or renewing their charters. The NELP can be used alongside their own local priorities, and in conjunction with delivering a rich local curriculum, to help every
must prepare an annual report under section 134 of the Education and Training Act 2020.
must prepare annual financial statements in the same format as the Kiwi Park model financial statements.
must retain appropriate documentation as evidence of educator qualifications: Refer to Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008, regulation 28(1)(e).
must submit a roll return to us in March and July each year. Schools with students in funding year levels 9 to 15 must also submit returns in June and September each year.
must use public sector public benefit entity (PBE) financial reporting standards.
name and amount of medicine given
names and signatures of the key people involved in its preparation and a review date.
names of educators and the children for whom they provided education and care
national and international reporting.
natural materials, for example, rocks, tree trunks, leaves, shells, flax
navigating this document than you need to, um,
needs immediate admission to hospital or
needs more tailored support, our team might provide specialist help to support your child's teacher. They may also work directly with your child.
needs treatment by a doctor within 48 hours of exposure to a substance.
new staff and what type of access they require for their role
new teacher starting employment in your service
news and information about the New Zealand education system
no child attends for more than 4 hours on any day and
no information has been provided
non-controllable health and safety issues
non-controllable health and safety issues stemming from an infectious disease (This only applies to the educator, not other residents in their household)
non-teaching and unregistered employees before the person begins work at the service and
not be made of materials that allow children to gain a foot or toe hold, for example mesh or netting with holes over 25mm in diameter.
not sharing your passwords with others
not the Ministry of Education's core business; and
not to say that it won't be explored at a later point in
not unduly restricted by Resource Consent conditions with regards to its use by the service to provide for outdoor experiences and
not unduly restricted by Resource Consent conditions with regards to its use by the service to provide for outdoor experiences; and
not used as a private dwelling.
not, I understand that question.
notes about equity funding and how this has been spent (when applicable).
notes and explanations about attendance, such as when a child is away sick or has attended for more/less hours than they were enrolled AND
notes made by medical staff
notices on the wall of the activity room
notices on the wall of the service
notional rolls for hospital-based services
now covered by the Animal Welfare Act 1999.
numbers and ages of children they will cater to
nursery rhymes/fairy stories
observations and learning stories
obtain information and guidance from agencies with expertise in early childhood learning and development, to the extent necessary, to:
of Education to be absent from school.
of NC QA exams or the last day of the school term?
of a longer conversation than that,
of all when seeking support and guidance? How do we include and respond to the diverse strengths and needs of children, parents,
of attendance codes to make it easier for schools
of boards, uh, having the ability to make decisions, um,
of children enrolled in the service; and
of concerns from those that we spoke to, um,
of contacting parents, uh,
of data recording and reporting.
of information that we are going to outline today.
of interest to the children in the group.
of mental illness, and it is a part of the, um,
of our earlier considerations is we were considering, um,
of people joined, um, or joining.
of proactive communication in the early new year as well.
of questions on this myself.
of sporadically over time.
of student-centered approach and,
of study leave until the last day of NCEA exams?
of the Early Childhood Education Funding Handbook, or
of the child and the importance of respectful, reciprocal, and responsive relationships.
of the codes was never intended as a pseudo mechanism
of the day is an m if there is travel involved,
of the day periods not at the start?
of the enrolled children in relation to the learning and development of, and decision making about, those children and
of the enrolled children in relation to the learning and development of, and decision making about, those children; and
of this information you've likely already seen, um,
of those areas that you saw, including a, um,
of those children about the operation of the service; and
of trustees will be given some guidelines.
of tuition in any given day, then you know, we,
of unjustified absence. Yes.
of why were the attendance codes changed, this was something
of you on this call, um, have historically used the codes
offer challenge and familiarity.
offer children a range of readily accessible books.
offer qualifications approved for student loans and/or allowances.
offer to provide a debrief to unsuccessful suppliers.
office. Restraint is only used as a short-term measure while other supports are put in place.
on GTP if only there for half days, et cetera.
on duty requirements for parents/
on mats spread on the floor or ground
on particular days of the week
on top of their base salary.
one session or day per week.
one, you know, one or more codes have been merged
only assign access to files and systems that staff need for their job, for example, not having access to staff payroll information if you do not need it
only provide admin access to people who need it for their job, for example, your information technology (IT) lead
only) learning environment.
open for at least 1 continuous period (session) of 2.5 hours per week.
opening and closing schools.
operating, supervision and qualification requirements for playcentres
opportunities for children to make decisions.
optional charges for special activities, extra staff or supplies for your child such as food or nappies
options for quality funding rates that are available for all parent/
or a dentist appointment, I'm coding
or a letter from the Ministry confirming the funding rate change (where necessary) as evidence that the service has not claimed quality level funding for more than five days/sessions of trained parents/
or a notice on the wall of the service.
or an E, I'm guessing it's a T
or as accurate, um, as what the true intent
or caregivers are involved in educating and caring for the children, and managing the service. They include Playcentres, playgroups and
or cultural events kind of at that, at
or donations, some have a regular fee, and others are free. It must be clear to parents and caregivers how much it will cost them to attend playgroup.
or have to look at timings, um, that, um,
or health problems are not eligible for an exemption from the absence rules.
or home-based service is by visiting. You can do this with your child or without.
or is sometimes returned home.
or it has been historically.
or its purpose, is to act as a quick reference guide.
or not acceptable in terms of that site stuff.
or other culturally recognised family group.
or other related marches.
or other, um, that is to be determined by school policy.
or permission from a parent slash caregiver, eg.
or refer to the NZQA website for more details.
or teachers who each work across several schools and
or the COPA of their school.
or the Police. You can also speak to them without making a notification. You can remain anonymous if needed.
or the information that has been
or the unknown temporary code until a reason
or they're representing, um, the country, then it can be a,
or they're sending in a message to say
or this upcoming change, um, please do email this mailbox.
or time in the sick bay, those are simply the four codes
or twice a day, then it's a bit different.
or will we find that in a different area?
or you get a Police vet yourself in the meantime.
or, um, internal exams during the year,
other frequent users of the property.
other government agencies where we are required or permitted to do so by law (such as under the Privacy Act 2020, the
other offences committed or a pattern of recurring offending
other regulatory agencies, where we consider sharing it may assist that regulatory agency to carry out its statutory functions
other services funded on notional rolls.
other subject matter experts where necessary.
our regional transport contract manager.
outline of the amount received under each Equity Funding component
outlines the fundamental beliefs, values and ideals that are important to the people involved in the service:
outlines the fundamental beliefs, values, and ideals that are important to the people involved in the service:
overseas students with domestic student status (for example, New Zealand residence visa holders or exchange students)
owned by a community organisation (e.g. a city council, church, or university)
paints (powder or liquid tempera and pallet)
paper of different size, texture, colour
parents and the wider community of the school
parents have given prior written approval of their child's participation
parents have given prior written approval of their child's participation and of the proposed ratios; and
parents have given prior written approval to their child's participation and of the proposed ratio for:
parents will participate in the supports offered, and work with the school, the Ministry and other agencies where required, to return children to regular attendance
parents, caregivers, families.
parents/caregivers have given prior written approval to their child's participation and of the proposed ratios for:
participate in the opportunities provided by the ECE service to engage with parents
participation in hospital-based services
partners through reflective practices?
perhaps the wider community
permanent full or part-time managers
permitted by Privacy Principles 10 and 11.
person responsible is absent
personal professional qualities and skills
persons responsible are on duty for all hours children are receiving education and care
persons responsible in licensed home-based services
phone your service manager or local office
phone your service manager or local office or
physical or sexual assaults or threats
pick up and set down students on the left-hand side of the road
picture books with simple text
pieces of wood, card, fabric
place your service on a provisional licence while you meet areas of non-compliance within a specified timeframe, or
placing an insert into a sink facility used for another purpose to prevent art materials from coming into contact with any cleaning waste or chemical residues, and/or to prevent paint or wastewater from coming into contact with the sink.
plain and coloured pencils
plan and evaluate the curriculum for children using the
plan for, provide, and review an education programme that is consistent with any curriculum framework prescribed by the Minister that applies to certificated playgroups and
planned housing developments
planning your roster or schedule before the start of the week, and making changes each day only if there was a change to the regulated (ratio) staff requirements for any of the hours in that day. By the end of the week, the planned staff record will have become a record of actual hours worked.
plantings (trees) and placement of movable equipment that negate the height of the fence
plastic animals and people
plastic tubing, bottles, sponges
please contact attendance codes review.
please email the attendance codes review mailbox
please email the everyday matters mailbox.
please, I'll put my email in the chat.
pliers (to hold nails with)
plus 1 in 4 families undertaking training in
plus 1 other person with attestation
poetry/rhyme and finger plays
position relationships, such as to whom the person is responsible, and to whom they relate
post an award notice on Government Electronic Tenders Service (GETS)
posters and wall displays
posting and nesting boxes
potential risks bordering the centre, for example, highways, rivers, other hazards
potentially the school Gazette as well, uh,
practice rather than process and,
preferably have a self-closing mechanism installed
prescribe content for Attendance Management Plans, including information about how the school will:
previous reviews, 'cause this hasn't there.
primary curriculum staffing
primary responsibilities, including intended outcomes of key tasks
principal and deputy principal(s)
priorities and aspirations and reflect these in our service?
privacy and the collection of images and recordings
private arrangements/commercial arrangements with operators.
private boarding for students from
professional development costs
professional development for teachers
professional leadership staffing for primary, intermediate, restricted composite and special schools.
professional services (e.g. CAANZ accountants)
programme for mokopuna funded as ECE until age 6.
programme is a series of health visits and support. It is free to all
promote and protect written and spoken language
promote and protect written and spoken language of children attending
promote the availability of the service within the community.
promptly notify all suppliers of the outcome in writing, ideally within 3 weeks of making the decision
protect the account from unauthorised access
protects them from becoming soiled
protozoa, such as giardia and cryptosporidium
provide a SHALLOW bowl of water and items for babies to splash and play with.
provide a safe environment at school for unloading and loading buses, including having the school bus stop in a safe location
provide advice and assistance to services about record keeping requirements.
provide all relevant supporting documentation (your auditor should provide you with a list).
provide assistance to attend the service (e.g. transport assistance)
provide assistance to attend the service (e.g. transport assistance).
provide assistance to attend the service (for example, transport assistance)
provide courses for parents and
provide education and care to children in attendance and guidance to staff providing education and care
provide extra professional development for staff and extra education for
provide for group and individual play
provide further guidance to help
provide good administration and financial accountability in expenditure of public funds, such as funding from the Ministry of Education.
provide incentives to retain
provide more information on that a little bit later.
provide more professional development opportunities for staff
provide opportunities for choice, planning and problem solving
provide opportunities for choice, planning, and problem solving
provide opportunities for exploration, curiosity, and for
provide positive guidance to children attending the playgroup in order to support children's learning.
provide professional development for staff
provide professional development to educators on a regular basis and keep records of any such activity.
provide programmes for children that are at least partly managed by the parents of the children attending the session.
provided at regular meetings
provided by a parent for the use of that child only or, in relation to
provided by a parent for the use of that child only.
provided by the service and kept in the first aid cabinet.
provided does not fit within school policy.
provided is considered trivial.
provides a positive learning environment for those children and
provides a positive learning environment for those children; and
provides advice for organisations interpreting and applying the safety checking regulations.
provides distance education from early childhood level to Year 13.
provides for the payment of various subsidies to licensed Early Childhood services.
provides learning advisors, teachers and in-region staff to work with students, their families and communities to help students achieve their potential.
provides more than a million free healthy lunches every week to
provides older children with the opportunity to concentrate and work on a project for a sustained period of time without fear of it being demolished by a young 'helper'
provides the basis and context for the curriculum regulatory requirements in the Regulations for all early learning services. The curriculum framework is set by the Minister of Education. The current framework was published in the New Zealand Gazette on 21 April 2023.
providing a range and variety of opportunities allows children to revisit familiar experiences and learning and engage with new or unfamiliar ones
providing a wide range of equipment and resources to use in many different ways
providing drinking fountains outdoors, or water coolers inside (these need to be secured to meet the standards of HS6 Securing furniture)
provision for growing indoor plants, seeds, bulbs, etc
provision for operational costs (such as electricity, telephone, food purchases and other day-to-day items) and maintenance of the premises as appropriate.
provision for operational costs (such as electricity, telephone, food purchases, and other day-to-day items) and maintenance of the premises as appropriate.
provision for operational costs and maintenance of the premises as appropriate.
provision for professional development
public holidays and local anniversary days
public holidays and observed provincial anniversary days
purchase additional curriculum resources and an increased range of supplies
purchase specific learning or teaching resources
putting in an enrolment scheme
qualifications and experience required for the position
qualifications and/or final year status
qualifications of certificated teachers
quarterly funding roll for March, June and September
question marks occur in the morning,
quick contact with emergency services when necessary
range of picture books to suit different ages, including:
reaching the attendance target is feasible
receive funding for equivalent full-time students
receive ongoing operational funding and staffing support. Private schools and early learning services can be unfunded members.
receives $1,000 when it joins a Community of Learning.
receiving ACC for a short period of time
reciprocal permissions in partner countries.
recognise the additional cultural and language competencies that certificated teachers in Pacific immersion and bilingual education and care services have to teach the curriculum in Pacific languages
recognise the additional skills certificated
recognises that around this age children are starting to interact with toilets. Sole use of potties does not provide opportunities for this learning experience.
recognising that sometimes children will play and learn successfully by themselves and at other times adult contribution will be needed to extend the play
record keeping requirements for hospital-based services.
record keeping requirements for parent/
record keeping requirements for playcentres.
record keeping requirements for teacher-led education and care services.
record keeping requirements.
recording days and times of actual attendance for each child (as described above)
records of allowance payments to certificated
records of allowance payments to certificated teachers.
records that verify each certificated
records that verify each certificated teacher hours of employment
records that verify how the initial and current salary of a certificated teacher employed in a management position was determined
records that verify how the initial and current salary of a certificated teacher employed in a management position was determined.
records that verify the pay rate at which each permanently employed certificated teacher is paid. This must include copies of signed employment contracts, letter of appointment and letter(s) confirming changes in salaries paid to certificated teachers
records to confirm salary or wage amounts.
recruit people with relevant language proficiency
reduce barriers to participation faced by those groups that are underrepresented in ECE services
reduce educational disparities between different groups in New Zealand communities
refers to any commercial activity, including advertising.
reflect different attitudes and feelings
reflect the cultural differences in the centre
reflect the special nature or philosophy of the centre
reflects an understanding of learning and development that is consistent with current research, theory, and practices in early childhood education and
reflects an understanding of learning and development that is consistent with current research, theory, and practices in early childhood education; and
regarding the attendance codes.
regarding the pre existing codes, which are still to be used
regular excursions at the time of enrolment and
regular outings or excursions at the time of enrolment, and
regularly review the access staff have and remove access they no longer need
reimburse expenses of voluntary helpers
reimbursement of actual and reasonable legal fees if you have talked to a lawyer about your claim.
reimbursement of actual and reasonable legal fees, if applicable.
relief managers (i.e., short term, long term or employed by an agency), or
reminds us to pause in our work, to look closely at the way our curriculum
reo rua education and care
repayable by the service to the Ministry of Education on request and
replaces the term 'local curriculum' with 'teaching and learning programmes'.
report it to your IT lead or the principal and seek further help
reproduce the material accurately
required adult:child ratios are maintained; and
required contextual background information if required.
requirements for quality funding rates
requires of parent and/or
requiring exterior doors and/or windows to be closed at all times.
requiring universities to have a statement on freedom of expression.
researching the supplier online
respects and acknowledges the aspirations of parents, family, and
respond to student absences at the specified thresholds and causes of student absence
responds to the learning interests, strengths, and capabilities of enrolled children and
responds to the learning interests, strengths, and capabilities of enrolled children; and
responsibilities to children
responsible for providing learning opportunities and care demonstrate an understanding of
responsible for providing learning opportunities and care to work effectively with
responsible for providing learning opportunities and care, sharing information of
responsible for providing positive learning opportunities and care engage in meaningful, positive interactions to enhance mokopuna learning and nurture reciprocal relationships.
revised or revamped descriptors.
revoke access if the user is leaving the school, or
right dose (use a standard measuring syringe or spoon)
risk analysis of education outside the classroom.
risk management processes
road signs (could be homemade)
role at a level 1 or 2 equivalent,
role or management position in a licensed
roles and responsibilities around record keeping and reporting
rolls of stretchable bandage
safe and durable (check for sharp edges, small parts that may break off and non-toxic durable paint)
safe and healthy practices by the service provider and
safe and healthy practices by the service provider; and
safe and hygienic practices and
safe and hygienic practices; and
safe and that provide sufficient space, facilities, and equipment to support the learning of children attending the playgroup and maintain their health and well-being; and
safe, well-drained and suitably surfaced for a variety of activities
safe, well-drained, and suitably surfaced for a variety of activities
safe, well-drained, and suitably surfaced for a variety of activities.
safety checking all transport staff in accordance with the Children's Act 2014.
safety pins, bandage clips or tape (or some other means of holding dressings in place)
saucepan or electric fry pan for cooked dough
school aged children must not be expected to help carry non-walking children or be responsible for evacuating ECE children
school organized activities, and work experience.
school utilisation and capacity
schools and the Ministry of Education will take action when student absence is a concern
schools have fewer full offers to evaluate
scissors and snips that cut properly, Sellotape, string, stapler
screwing activities for example, nuts and bolts, plastic jars and lids
secondary curriculum staffing.
see secondary schools, it's kind of every hour
select a minimum salary scale
select the link below to search via school name.
selection and appointment procedures
send us a learning support request form.
send us an expression of interest form. A person from your regional office will be in touch.
senior management allowances for secondary schools only.
sensory objects to touch, taste, shake, smell, bang, push, prod, and look at.
separate sections or columns for children aged under two and for children aged 2 and over
service at an immersion and bilingual level
service or organisational policies.
service soon after your baby is born.
services beginning or ceasing to offer 20 Hours ECE
services beginning, or ceasing, to offer 20 Hours ECE
services disregard the individual needs of
services in your area are listed on Health New Zealand's website.
services prepared foods for 4 to 6-year-olds in accordance with the Ministry of Health guidance for 1 to 3-year-olds for the sake of efficiency or
services that are recognised by the Ministry as meeting the requirements for teacher-led funding rates.
services that are required to meet teacher certification requirements will have higher labour costs, and
sets out food safety rules for early learning services.
sets shared goals, or achievement challenges, based on the needs of its children and young people. The
sets the direction so that no student will be left to accumulate absences without an appropriate response to return them to regular attendance
setting up the environment to reduce the potential of conflict
several changes of clothes plus a bag for dirty clothes to be sent home in (expect your child to get messy while playing)
sharing their aspirations? Whose aspirations are missing and why? How can we gain these?
sharing with schools and parents refreshed health guidance to support good decisions about school attendance.
should be included and encouraged to contribute to discussions about their child's progress and achievements. The assessment process should recognise people, places, and things that support a child's learning, and the ways in which children assess their own learning.
should be included and encouraged to contribute to discussions about their children's progress and achievements. The assessment process should recognise people, places, and things that support a child's learning, and the ways in which children assess their own learning.
should be organised with groups of children in ways that support secure and consistent care, language learning pathways, and positive transitions for children and
should be sought and embedded in the plan, and the plan should at least demonstrate when the service plans to involve these groups in planning.
should be woven and considered through all curriculum criteria.
should draw on knowledge gained from the child and their parents and
should enable mokopuna to engage in meaningful interactions with people, places, and things.
should encourage children to modify their activity or defer it until the appropriate level of supervision can be provided.
should encourage children to modify their activity, or defer it until the appropriate level of supervision can be provided.
should guide children on how to use equipment appropriately and safely.
should have regular conversations about how play is supervised in their own setting.
should purposely and intentionally respond to the strengths, interests, abilities and needs of each child, and at times seek additional support from outside agencies in relation to learning, behaviour, development, or communication.
should seek to develop mutually positive relationships with
should set 3 to 5 achievement challenges based on the key priorities in their community.
should share with, and support, parents and
sieves, funnels, boats, measuring beakers, jugs
sign an attestation to confirm that you have paid all certificated teachers at least the minimum salary amounts for the period of the RS7 return.
signature of a parent/caregiver (dated).
signature sheets where regulated (ratio) staff have signed (in full) at the end of each week that the Staff Record is a true and correct record of their actual hours worked for that week
significant increases in enrolments.
significant increases or decreases in enrolments.
signing out of your device when you are not using it
simple inset puzzles with knobs
sit on a mat or at an outside table
sitting on grass or other outdoor surfaces.
sitting on grass, bark or other surfaces.
sitting on the edge of low decks
slight increase in attendance from Term 1 2023 to 2024.
small and large cars, trucks and trailers
small hard foods that are difficult for children to bite or chew (for example, nuts, large seeds, popcorn husks, raw carrot, apple, celery)
small prams and pushchairs (well-balanced so do not tip easily)
smaller blocks (could have smaller coloured blocks or Duplo)
so I can see which order, uh, in order, uh,
so ag missing an hour every day
so it would actually be a presence.
so secondary schools who have have counseling in schools
so the recording will be using the presentation, uh,
so we have the, um, alternative provision.
so, um, please jot them down in the chat.
so, um, when they head off to those, um,
soft untreated wood in a variety of shapes and sizes
some visibility from another area of the service is possible.
some work that's provided for them.
something you are, such as a fingerprint
something you have, such as an identification (ID) card.
something you know, such as a pin for your phone
sometimes can make it to school, child might be brought
special excursions prior to the excursion taking place; and
special outings or excursions prior to the outing or excursion taking place; and
special topics, for example visit to hospital, new baby
specific spouting requirements
specific teaching practice
specific teaching resources such as a dance or music teacher
specify the period in which a board must review its Attendance Management Plan and readopt the plan or adopt a new or amended plan.
speech-language therapists
sponges (to keep clay moist)
spoons, spatula, eggbeater or whisk
staff employed by other organisations who work at your service such as early intervention teachers.
staff to carry out any business requiring phone contact.
staffing costs, including leave entitlements
staffing records as described in this section and
starting employment in your service
statement of National Education and Learning Priorities
sterile saline solution (or some other means of cleansing wounds)
sterile wound dressings, including sticking plasters
storage containers for flour, cornflour and so on.
store curriculum support materials and
store curriculum support materials; and
stories from other cultures
strengthening accountability of school boards
strengthening the focus on attendance, including a new requirement for boards to have attendance management plans
student is absent without explanation
students have higher achievement when in Level 1
students sponsored by the New Zealand Agency for International Development (NZAID).
students studying offshore
students who are representing their region.
students will understand why attendance is important, and that their parents, teachers and leaders will support them to be at school and learning.
students' progress every year and
subsidise learning experiences outside the service
suitability of fences, gates, or structures to mitigate the risks identified
supervise and be actively involved with children in attendance and staff providing education and care (even when children and staff are located in separate spaces)
supervise loading and unloading of the bus at school
suppliers do not need to prepare a full offer unless they have been shortlisted and have a reasonable chance of getting the contract.
supply fresh air for breathing
supplying structured cabling product
support ECE services in raising their level of educational achievement.
support Pacific immersion and bilingual education and care services to recognise, retain and attract certificated teacher with the additional language skills they require.
support all children to develop prosocial strategies for learning with and alongside others?
support children if challenges or difficulties arise and intervene if there is potential danger. To ensure risk is minimised or eliminated, teachers, educators and
support children if challenges or difficulties arise, and intervene if there is potential danger. To ensure risk is minimised or eliminated, teachers, educators and
support claims for funded child hours (FCHs)
support the learning and development of enrolled children and
support the learning and development of enrolled children; and
support the provision of different types of indoor and outdoor experiences and
support the provision of different types of indoor and outdoor experiences; and
support transition from home to the early childhood service and from the early childhood service to school
supported to be active participants in the development of our curriculum priorities?
supported to evaluate their role as
supporting policy analysis
supporting students that have not achieved the NCEA co-requisites.
supports the processes to make sure teachers meet and maintain the necessary standards needed to teach
suspend or cancel your licence in serious cases of non-compliance.
sustaining a serious injury from play equipment.
take all reasonable precautions to prevent accidents and the spread of infection among children enrolled in the service and
take all reasonable precautions to prevent accidents and the spread of infection among children enrolled in the service; and
take all reasonable steps each month to observe each child participating in the service while that child is receiving education and care
take all reasonable steps to ensure that appropriate procedures are in place to deal with fires, earthquakes, and other emergencies.
take all reasonable steps to ensure that the premises, facilities, and other equipment on those premises are:
take all reasonable steps to make sure students attend when the school is open
take all reasonable steps to make sure students enrolled in their school attend, as required under section 36(2) of the Act
take all reasonable steps to observe, support, and provide guidance on the implementation of the prescribed curriculum framework by the service and keep records of these activities
take all reasonable steps to promote the good health and safety of children enrolled in the service and
take all reasonable steps to promote the good health and safety of children enrolled in the service; and
take the form of individual or group learning
take the time to share their aspirations and expertise about their
taking more days off school.
talk about the procedures without needing to refer to any documentation
talk about the procedures without needing to refer to any documentation.
talk to staff at your regional office about early learning services and needs in your area.
targeted effective learning support
tea towels (wash regularly)
teachers and schools are supported by a detailed, knowledge-rich curriculum and will know what needs to be taught and when
teachers with current practising certificates
teachers with limited authority to teach.
teaches early childhood, primary, secondary and special needs students using multimedia and online learning. Your child can also study 1 or 2 courses if a subject they want to study is not available at their school.
teaching and learning in a representative sample of English-medium primary and secondary schools.
technology education staffing
telephones, cash register.
tells us what should happen when students do not attend school.
testing accuracy and responsiveness of the technology
textured rugs and cushions for infants to crawl over.
than they do in English medium education. With this in mind, we have much work to do to support our education partners and grow
that I believe has ever been conducted.
that I would like to run over.
that Marika, um, put through.
that a New Zealand Police vet was obtained
that a risk assessment was undertaken
that actually, no, we would really appreciate if you the
that an interview was conducted
that are identifying achievement challenges.
that are in effect for the remainder of term 4 20 24,
that are in most need of support.
that are not affiliated to TRN or NKAI, and
that at least 1 referee was contacted and relevant information obtained.
that can also meet the quality funding requirement below are eligible for quality funding rates.
that carries or maintains the
that children are treated with dignity and respect.
that come into effect from term one next year,
that could be used as well.
that each early childhood education service weaves for its children.
that gives effect to that.
that have a statutory agreement with the Secretary for Education will be required to have particular regard to the NELP in developing a plan.
that if they've turned up for a little bit,
that in terms of connecting to their culture.
that in theory should have been present this entire time.
that is DI would think Jared, that if the sub, um,
that is of sufficient variety, quantity and quality to meet the nutritional and developmental needs of each child.
that may have that looming question.
that meet certain additional requirements.
that membership of any relevant professional organisation or licensing/registration authority was checked
that might not be taking these down.
that national level has historically been a form
that providers can adapt for early learning services.
that question from Donna, so
that relates to the existing codes
that said, yeah, well, what about the
that self-governing schools and,
that suits your family, check out the options near you on Education Counts. Their website includes the school zone information for schools that have one.
that the main ones are wanted to point your attention to.
that the more fulsome attendance code guidelines,
that the reason for absence has been explained.
that the service is paying
that the service is paying PITA to their certificated teachers on top of their base salary.
that the service teaches in Pacific languages 51-80% of the time or 81-100% of the time, and
that there is some other work stream going on,
that these aren't acceptable reasons from the Ministry
that they still had the ability within their SMS, um,
that they're taking the afternoon off, then it would be a J.
that was actually done quite collaboratively.
that was done in isolation.
that we can produce those reports.
that we have the day off for our birthday.
that we're always dealing in the grave
that we've made a very clear call on is the M code.
that were getting lunches that drop out of the 25% threshold will still be part of
that were not in the school lunches programme before will be invited to join.
that weren't necessarily able to attend.
that when they go on exam leave, I would be marking them
that would be greatly appreciated.
that would be under the bot related codes, is that correct?
that would benefit from free lunches. Funding is limited, so we aim to reach the top 25% of students in schools and
that would counter that, uh, in terms of their inability
that you can see on your screen.
that you do the role or every time they move classes.
that's a school policy decision.
that's attending or the, the, they would be classified
that's probably down to a practice decision at a,
that, that proceed, you know, that came together
that, what I can say is this was something that
the 20 Hours ECE Attestation section of the Enrolment Agreement Form completed by the parent/guardian if the child is to receive 20 Hours ECE at this service, and
the Concluding Observations of the United Nations Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (2022).
the EC11 Playcentre form.
the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008
the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008, and the Licensing Criteria for Early Childhood Education and Care Centres 2008
the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008, and the Licensing Criteria for Home-based Education and Care Services 2008
the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008.
the Education and Training Act 2020
the Frequent Absence Rule.
the Ministry of Education
the Ministry of Social Development has a childcare subsidy to help some families with childcare costs.
the Optional Charges Agreement section of the Enrolment Agreement Form to be completed by the parent/guardian.
the Persons responsible (Co-ordinator / visiting teacher) notes taken during the visit
the Persons responsible (Co-ordinator / visiting teacher) schedule of planned visits (spreadsheet, diary and so on)
the Police, if our staff are threatened or abused.
the RS3 Initial Application for Funding for an Early Childhood Service
the SESTA Conveyance Allowance
the Three-Week Rule for Continuous Absence and
the Tuesday following Easter Monday
the Tuesday following Easter.
the Unfunded International Providers (UIP) Portal for Private Training Establishments (PTEs) that do not receive Government funding.
the V code is, is marked as a, as a type of presence.
the absence pattern of the frequently absent child again (as part of checking the absence patterns for all children in your service).
the action specified in Appendix 2 is taken for any person (adult or child) suffering from particular infectious diseases and
the action specified in Appendix 2 is taken for any person (adult or child) suffering from particular infectious diseases; and
the actual dates and times that each child was cared for over the period that the service was reconstituted.
the actual hours worked each day by each regulated (ratio) staff member
the actual number of regulated (ratio) staff that were required during each hour of the day to meet regulated (ratio) staff requirements
the actual times and dates each person responsible worked
the adults responsible for providing education and care as part of the service; and
the age and understanding of the child
the ages and abilities of the children attending
the agreement of the parents and/or guardians involved.
the amount and details of the expenditure of any Ministry of Education funding received by the service
the amount and details of the expenditure of any Ministry of Education funding received by the service and
the amount and details of the expenditure of any Ministry of Education funding received by the service, and
the amount and details of the expenditure of any Ministry of Education funding received by the service; and
the amount of time that has passed since the offending, whether any more offending has happened and whether behavioural change has happened since
the annual top-up for isolated services.
the area surrounding each child allows sufficient air movement (to minimise the risk of spreading illness) and
the area surrounding each child allows sufficient air movement to minimise the risk of spreading illness; and
the attendance code decision tree really had the end user,
the attendance code decision tree, um, and, uh, how
the average number of children in each age group and the hours they are expected to attend the service during the advance period and
the calculated funded child hours for each day during a selected week for
the child's full name, date of birth, and address
the completion of 2,080 hours of work at a Pacific immersion or bilingual service, and
the condition and placement of equipment
the condition and placement of equipment; and
the condition and placement of learning, play and other equipment
the conditions a service must meet
the cost and availability of the service.
the council is aware there has been, or is potential for, a risk to a child's wellbeing or safety while at an early learning service and needs to notify us.
the criteria we use to assess your application
the date each of these safety check components were completed.
the date of booked first aid training.
the date or dates on which the person was engaged or employed by the organisation and
the date or dates on which the person was engaged or employed by the organisation, and
the date that the child will no longer be enrolled and attending the service (the termination date of the enrolment agreement) as advised by the parent/guardian or
the date the child commenced attendance at the service and their finish date
the date the service will begin offering 20 Hours ECE.
the date they must be met by.
the date they started in that role
the date, time and description of the injury, illness or incident
the dates their ballots will be held.
the days and times each child is expected to attend, and details of any later changes to the agreement signed and dated by at least one parent/guardian
the definition of children's worker and how this is applied to determine who to safety check
the definitions of Certificated Teacher Hours and regulated (ratio) staff
the difference between general purpose financial statements and a special purpose financial report
the difference between standard and quality funding rates
the educator does not yet have a first aid qualification
the educator is part of a licensed home-based service, and
the emergency plan needs to include how all children in the home will be safely evacuated at the same time
the emergency supplies in the home should be sufficient to also provide for the older children who are also present in the home.
the estimated % of regulated (ratio) staff hours that will be covered by certificated teachers and whether a service attests to paying at or above certain minimum salary levels (education and care services, hospital-based services only).
the excursion supervision plan
the expected number of days of operation for the coming 4 months
the first aid requirements in criterion HS25 are met in relation to those children and any children remaining at the premises
the first and last name of each child, clearly identified
the full names and qualifications of each person counting towards regulated qualification requirements
the funded child hours claimed by the service in the RS7 Return process.
the funded hours that the service will be open and
the funding claim may be reviewed and funding withheld and/or
the funding claim may be reviewed, and funding withheld, and/or
the funding process for new services
the goods, services or contract works that need to be delivered or undertaken
the ground rules for attending playgroup sessions
the groupings themselves made logical sense.
the health and wellbeing of the
the holiday for turn time, the G code.
the home of the person providing the education or care or
the hours a casually or conditionally enrolled child attends the service.
the hours a permanently enrolled child is enrolled to attend the service or
the kind of food provided, for example, food cooked at the centre or packed lunches brought by the children
the learning outcomes expected for children
the length of time children attend
the length of time in a SESTA vehicle
the length of time the service operates
the link, please scroll up to the top of this chat.
the location and method of travel
the location of the excursion
the manner in which information is released
the minimum amount of access they require for each of these systems.
the minimum salary scale for certificated teachers employed in a management position in education and care services
the minimum salary scale for certificated teachers employed in education and care services
the monthly confirmation of records is completed on time.
the most recent Education Review Office report regarding the service
the most recent Education Review Office report regarding the service.
the name and address of at least 1 parent
the name of the medical practitioner (or medical centre) who should, if practicable, be consulted if the child is ill or injured
the name of the medical practitioner with overall responsibility for the child's care
the name of the school(s) you are complaining about
the name/signature of those checking them while in bed (every 5-10 minutes), and
the names of adults and children involved
the names of rostered persons responsible
the names of staff used for regulated (ratio) staff requirements at any time during the day
the names of the people authorised by the parent to collect the child and
the names of the people authorised by the parent to collect the child; and
the nature and severity of the offending
the nature of the work the person is/was engaged in.
the nature of the work the person was/is engaged in.
the next set of Government actions that will further contribute to achieving the vision and 5 key shifts for Pacific education success.
the notes to the financial statement should state how each type of funding has been spent (if a service has received more than one type of funding).
the number and ages of other children attending
the number of children attending your centre
the number of convictions that are relevant to the role
the number of days the service will be open and
the number of funded child hours per day for the previous 4 actual months
the number of kits you choose to have.
the number of out-of-zone places
the overall outcome the procurement needs to achieve
the period you were at the school (this can be an estimate)
the person (or people) responsible for having the role of providing day-to-day care for the child and
the person (or people) responsible for having the role of providing day-to-day care for the child, and
the person with the conflict
the philosophy that underpins the service
the physical layout of the home (and related supervision issues)
the playgroup is effectively managed in accordance with good management practices; and
the playgroup is managed in a collaborative way with the parents and caregivers involved; and
the positions of responsibility playgroup need to be managed effectively
the practising certificate has been renewed
the predicted return time, and
the procurement requirements
the prohibition of particular activities (such as music)
the purpose for setting up the playgroup
the purpose of a safety check
the purpose of each application, who should use them, and
the purpose of their investigation and area of responsibility
the reason why access to first aid training is limited
the receipt of urgent medical attention.
the recommendation report.
the regional property team
the relevance of the information in the Police vet to the role being vetted for
the relevance of the information in the Police vet to the role being vetted for (for example, whether there are any matters relating to children or other vulnerable people)
the requirements of the Education (Early Childhood Services) Regulations 2008 are still met by the service
the resources and availability the supplier will need to meet your expected timeframes
the safety of the student, other students, and driver on the service
the school bulletin a couple of times, um,
the school thought the student was out of zone, but the student actually lives in the zone, or
the schools were very much in favor of merging all
the service has not met the financial reporting requirements for early childhood education (ECE) services that are outlined in
the service has temporarily closed and for the period of that closure, or
the service is effectively governed and is managed in accordance with good management practices; and
the service itself, or another service
the service or the service provider is in receivership or liquidation.
the service provider has not met any of the conditions set out in the Early Childhood Education Funding Handbook or in any other documentation which was the basis for receiving funding. This includes the failure by the service(s) to maintain accurate records to the standard required by the Ministry,
the service provider is in debt to the Ministry and is unable or unwilling to repay the Ministry either immediately or within the timeframe prescribed by the Ministry, or
the service provider regularly collaborates with:
the service will have to pay back the total amount of any overpayment.
the service's current licence certificate and
the service's current licence certificate; and
the service's operational documents (such as its philosophy, policies and procedures and any other documents that set out how day-to-day operations will be conducted); and
the service's operational documents (such as its philosophy, policies, and procedures and any other documents that set out how day to day operations will be conducted) and
the service's operational documents (such as its philosophy, policies, and procedures and any other documents that set out how day-to-day operations will be conducted)
the service's operational documents (such as its philosophy, policies, and procedures and any other documents that set out how day-to-day operations will be conducted); and
the service's operational documents and
the service's operational documents; and
the signature of the person responsible giving approval for the excursion to take place.
the signs and symptoms of child abuse and neglect
the skills and expertise the supplier requires
the student has started their final year at school and is assessed as ineligible from a new residential address
the student would be significantly disadvantaged by not being enrolled at that school (only in exceptional circumstances), or
the supplier has completed all declarations
the symptoms of the illness
the time and date of the excursion
the time and date of the outing
the total actual hours worked each day by Other Teachers who were counted towards regulated (ratio) staff requirements.
the total actual hours worked each day by certificated teachers who were counted towards regulated (ratio) staff requirements (including hours worked by Other Teachers acting as relievers for up to 80 discretionary hours) for education and care and hospital-based services, and kindergartens.
the total number of children attending on any occasion is not greater than 4 times the number of parents and caregivers present in the same play area at the same time.
the total number of children in the reconstituted service does not exceed the maximum service size of 80
the two exam related codes, the index,
the type of contract you will use and key contract terms and conditions.
the type of staff who are employed, that is, if there are any administrative staff.
the user management admin role is assigned to a staff member helping managing users instead of the super admin role
the v in the X code are important.
the website's design elements or any photography and imagery.
the wellbeing of their family and community is supported
the written permission of a parent of the child is obtained before the travel begins (unless the child is travelling with their parent).
the written permission of a parent of the child is obtained before the travel begins (when children are not travelling with their parent).
the written permission of the parent of the child is obtained before the travel begins.
the, um, Q code now will be a board decision.
their applicable qualification group, and
their family, culture, knowledge, and community are respected and
their initial safety check
their learning at 1 level sets the foundation for the next steps along a chosen pathway.
their own valued learning, taking into consideration the aspirations and learning priorities of
their previous 5 years of work history
their role at the service
there are adequate provisions available for the treatment of minor injuries
there are communication systems in place so that people know where the children are, and adults can communicate with others as necessary.
there are communication systems in place so that people know where the children are, and the educator can communicate with others as necessary.
there are exceptional circumstances that were not considered during the initial application (eg your child is living in emergency housing or has been affected by displacement or natural disaster)
there are exceptional circumstances that were not considered during the initial application (for example, a student is living in emergency housing or has been affected by displacement or natural disaster)
there are, uh, transition plans that, um,
there has been a complaint or incident involving a child that needs further investigation.
there is a place set aside for the children to sit and eat (PF12 Dining facilities).
there is a place set aside for the children to sit and eat (PF15).
there is a school bus or public transport in your area, but you live more than 2.4km from the nearest bus route.
there is also the health school code
there is new information available that may alter the original assessment.
there is no school bus available, or
there is no school bus or public transport available in your area, or
there was a slight term-on-term increase in attendance from Term 1 2023 to 2024.
there were a few codes that we sought to, uh,
there've been, um, that've happened kind
these changes should be made in time for next year.
they are safe and appropriate for the age/weight and number of children needing to use them
they have to take other kids with them.
they live more than 2.4 km from the nearest school bus route.
they're representing their region
think about how the space can support infants and toddlers to explore movement such as rolling, crawling, pulling themselves up, climbing and walking
thinking aloud, when working on problems together adults can share their thoughts and show how they go about solving problems
this definitely was not something
this shared as soon as we can.
those will be uploaded, uh, before years end.
three sessions or days per week
three sessions or days per week.
through meaningful experiences.
through next year, uh, around that with a a,
through the Education Gazette.
through the allowance steps described in this section is only a required funding condition while a service attests to meeting the requirements of this allowance. If a service chooses not to attest, at any point, the condition does not apply. However, legal agreements that specify allowance entitlements may still apply (for example, employment contracts).
through the bulletin about if there is an update
time was one of the things that schools were telling us.
time, um, but we weren't looking to create any new codes.
to Christchurch for an appointment, stayed over for a day,
to a number of school leaders.
to access and engage with services available for children who need additional support for their learning.
to access this application.
to achieve excellent and equitable outcomes and provides an organising framework for the actions we will take.
to actively participate in decisions that affect the education of their children? How do we ensure these processes are effective?
to actively participate in decisions that affect the education of their children? How do we ensure they are effective?
to administer to improve the consistency
to also incorporate travel time as well.
to anxiety related reasons.
to apply for the following types of school transport assistance on behalf of their
to appointments out of town,
to appointments outta town,
to ask questions, connect with other parents and find resources and information.
to assist children considered to be from disadvantaged backgrounds. Targeted Funding is available to licensed, early learning services that meet specific eligibility criteria.
to avoid parking issues at school, eg, like a lake road.
to be able to share this with people
to be changed before the EOD?
to be changed for the everyday matters reports so
to be confident in their own culture and respect other cultures.
to be defined by school policy.
to be involved in the development of policies and procedures?
to be learning from home, um, if they've got some, um,
to be offsite learning opportunities, um, and some schools
to be recording attendance, um, every day to record
to be seen, read, heard and spoken.
to be updated not too often.
to be, um, a one stop shop.
to bear when reviewing our service philosophy?
to board of trustees around the decisions.
to capture time loss, eg, like late code
to come in in 2026, uh, pending some decisions.
to comply with the requirements of Schedule 4 (which relates to activity spaces)
to comply with the requirements of Schedule 4 (which relates to activity spaces).
to contact your SMS providers.
to continue the Healthy School Lunches Programme for 2 more years, including $8 million to introduce a targeted early childhood food programme
to contribute to hazard and risk management systems, processes and practice?
to create this new code board approved offsite learning.
to decide in terms of their policies.
to demonstrate compliance with the criterion; and
to develop their knowledge and practices.
to discuss how to adjust their future funding.
to discuss their situation and to obtain an EC20 form if appropriate.
to engage in meaningful interactions with people, places, and things.
to engage in professional reading and to discuss and debate ideas and theories, identifying meaningful ways to put their new knowledge into practice.
to enhance and extend the whole development of
to ensure that parents have access to important information about their child's sleeping patterns while at the service.
to ensure the safety and wellbeing of the
to explain the absence, but the absence
to find out why their child is absent?
to follow attendance code decision tree,
to formally review and refresh their achievement challenges every 2 to 5 years, with the appointment of a new lead principal, or if goals are reached.
to get those, those certificates.
to give you three minutes back,
to guide our teaching decisions and curriculum design and planning?
to have an attendance management plan.
to have some very clear examples in the courage guidelines
to incorporate a lot of these questions.
to learn about review and to improve the effectiveness of self-review processes.
to my knowledge in existence from around 2006.
to physically track students.
to physically track where a student was, um, and now,
to progress to their next step they will need to demonstrate that they meet the appropriate professional Standards.
to properly fulfil the duties and responsibilities connected with their employment. This will include, rostered hours, non-contact hours, staff meetings, paid professional learning and development and any paid leave.
to provide an opportunity to understand
to provide more detail about ways to do this.
to provide that guidance.
to provide useful information in the event of any allergic reactions that may develop in children attending.
to providing much needed clarity.
to realise high expectations.
to realise their aspirations and thrive with their
to reasonably be able to travel there daily.
to recognise how well their current practices meet the needs of the learners and highlight areas where
to record added granularity.
to record if a student leaves early
to remain current in their understanding of learning and development, theories, and practices. Regular professional learning and development (formal and informal) should support
to review the nappy change procedure, for example:
to school but doesn't get out of car
to search for and access relevant content, tools and resources:
to section 53 of the Education
to section 53 of the act.
to show that the care arrangement has been approved and that funding can be claimed.
to some eligible children and not to other eligible children
to support learning and development in the home
to support the acquisition and use of
to take other kids with them.
to take, uh, you know, other kids with them if there's, if,
to teachers who hold 0-5 salary units.
to test working theories.
to the caregiver notification slash text guidelines?
to the inaugural, um, sector information session.
to the preexisting codes for the remainder of this year,
to the question section, I will put a link, um,
to the revised codes or the,
to them In the first instance, if you have a question
to track patterns of attendance,
to use premises and facilities that, having regard to the number and age range of the children attending the premises, provide sufficient and suitable space for a range of activities, facilities for food preparation, eating, sleeping, storage, toileting, and washing, and sufficient and suitable heating, lighting, noise control, ventilation, and equipment to support:
to value their knowledge and expertise and ensuring continuity between home and the early learning settings? (
to value their knowledge and expertise, and ensure continuity between home and the early learning settings? (
to view the following information:
to, to have a stab at that one.
to, uh, as we've got it there,
tools and online services, through the Education Sector Log-on.
towels use for children if they become messy or wet whilst at the service
trace actions to specific users when there is an issue
training in operation of technology
training.education.govt.nz
transporting students to multiple addresses.
travels to within 2.4 km of both your home and school
travels to within 2.4km of the roadside gate of the student's home
travels to within 2.4km of their school or
treated as a debt which the Ministry can offset against all or any funding sums payable by the Ministry to the service provider.
treating non-safety-glazed windows, doors and low-level mirrors with safety film
treating wired glass panels with safety film.
tree We will look at next.
triangular bandage (or some other means of immobilising an upper limb injury)
trolley or shelves for storage of wood, tools and accessories
trolleys, push and pull along toys, wheelbarrows.
trough for sand and/or water
truant code, um, there was a lot of confusion when,
trucks, diggers, graders, and so on
try to make your password 16 characters or more
uh, around the medical leave that schools can request, um,
uh, so I can see what's coming through.
uh, unjustified absences.
um, Alison as well in that area.
um, an n present, but out of class.
um, and for the attendance codes to be front of mind.
um, is a, uh, really does hit the mark in terms of
um, particularly in, um, kapa, like, uh,
um, provide a consistent, um, a a consistent
um, was throughout this process, one of our earlier, um, one
understand the practices and procedures of our service?
understanding of aspirations and expectations for
understandings of aspirations and expectations for
undertake a risk assessment.
undo any problematic changes.
units in English medium schools, where some students at the school learn in
universities will be required to publicly report on academic freedom and freedom of speech in their annual reports and to maintain complaints processes.
university councils will have a duty to protect and promote academic freedom and freedom of speech and
unless deemed medically necessary.
up to 6 hours ECE Funding Subsidy (Under 2s and 2 and Overs) per licensed child-place per day.
up to 6 hours per day, and 30 hours per week for each child eligible for 20 Hours ECE (made up of 20 Hours ECE hours and Plus 10 ECE hours)
updates to the implementation supports hub and our 5-year implementation timeline.
uphold a minimum level of quality education by ensuring that children have easy access to the outdoor environment
uphold children's safety and a minimum level of quality education by ensuring the area is well-drained and has suitable surfacing.
uphold children's safety by ensuring that the outdoor environment is securely fenced so that 'escape' is less likely and
urban public transport services provided by regional authorities
urban public transport services provided by regional authorities.
us, so we can reset your accounts such as Education Sector Logon (ESL) and we can inform Education Payroll (EPL)
use a supervision plan approved by Playcentre Aotearoa, and
use a trough, trays on a table or, if on the floor, use a tarpaulin.
use adequate soap or detergent
use an approved electronic attendance register and Ministry-approved attendance codes to record attendance.
use an empty paddling pool to create a play pit, use balls, washable scarves and ribbons and
use fabrics of different textures (lace, hessian, fur, linen) to make balls, rugs etc for babies to play with
used for a specific period of time to treat a specific condition or symptom and
used for a specific period of time to treat a specific condition or symptom; and
used for the 'first aid' treatment of minor injuries and
used for the 'first aid' treatment of minor injuries; and
used for the ongoing treatment of a pre-diagnosed condition (such as asthma, epilepsy, allergic reaction, diabetes, eczema and so on) and
used for the ongoing treatment of a pre-diagnosed condition (such as asthma, epilepsy, allergic reaction, diabetes, eczema and so on); and
used safely and kept free from hazards and
used safely and kept free from hazards; and
using a password manager.
using a revised set of attendance codes.
using a roster system of parents to pick up and return linen for laundering so that you can ensure a good supply of clean linen. If parents are to be used, ensure you have clear procedures, which ensure hygienic laundering.
using an email address you no longer have access to, contact us to change the address and password.
using and reviewing the updated NCEA support materials
using individually marked water bottles or sipper cups. Water bottles or sipper cups will need to be emptied and washed daily
using language that encourages discussion, thinking, negotiation and humour
using open-ended questions for example, how, why, what do you think?
using play equipment and resources, both indoors and outdoors
using public transport (where available)
using technology or while they are in the presence of technology while it is being used by others in the home.
utilities (electricity and telephone).
value as learning for their children?
values and principles consistent with
vandalism, dangerous objects, and foreign materials
vandalism, dangerous objects, and foreign materials (for example broken glass, animal droppings)
vandalism, dangerous objects, and foreign materials (for example, broken glass, animal droppings)
variety of boxes, cartons and tubes
variety of cardboard and paper
variety of materials for example wool, fabric, natural materials, old cards, egg cartons, crepe paper, cellophane, magazines, glitter, corks etc.
variety of nails, magnet to pick up nails
vehicles having current registration and warrants of fitness
ventilation (natural or mechanical) that allows fresh air to circulate (particularly in sanitary and sleep areas)
ventilation (natural or mechanical) that allows fresh air to circulate (particularly in sanitary and sleep areas) and
verification of identity (including previous identities)
verify that a service is meeting the record keeping requirements
verify that the service is claiming and receiving the correct amount of funding
verify the certification status of teachers employed by the service
verify the certification status of teachers employed by the service.
vices attached to ends of bench (left hand and right hand) or G clamps
view the regions below or
viruses, such as rotavirus, norovirus/Norwalk-like viruses
visit each educator engaged in the service at least once per month
visit other services in your area to find out what types of services are already in your community
visits outside the home setting
volunteers. Sessions are held regularly. Some offer 1 session a week and some more. Children can go as many times a week as you like, but not for more than 4 hours per day.
wait for the all-clear from the duty teacher at school before departing on the home run.
wall textiles especially thick wall hangings and 3-dimensional decorations rather than flat pictures
wanted to get the bus earlier
was based off of a identified need, um,
was given to the Ministry by
was open between 1960 and 2010. We have researched the school and made standard findings about what was happening there each decade that it was open.
was published in September 2022. It identified nine target languages and described the status, current health and aspirations for these languages in Aotearoa. It also described a tailored approach to different languages to recognise these circumstances.
was refreshed in 2024 and is the overview of the network of
water trough or plastic bowls
we acknowledge that not all appointments can be made
we are looking forward to having
we did have a, a number, I'm gonna say maybe a couple
we don't really require a medical certificate
we don't really use those codes.
we had offsite class course and distance learning,
we have conduct/competence concerns about an early learning teacher, or
we have included that within the m code for illness
we have incorporated these key messages into the vision and principles of Ka Hikitia and Tau Mai Te Reo.
we haven't created any new codes at this point.
we used the s code in order to, uh, in order
we weren't looking to change at all.
we will be reporting question marks.
we would really appreciate if you could delineate the,
we've, we've put a stake in the ground,
website has more information.
well, um, we used to be able,
were learning in Level 1 (which was 8.4% of the total
what I believe are some very positive changes
what I would call design constraints, um,
what about a code for counseling appointments?
what equipment is provided
what happens if a sight impaired family member of a child attending the service has a guide dog
what happens if you have tried every way
what hours each shift will need to cover and
what is involved in these positions and how they are filled.
what it is because our question mark, e
what opportunity is there for educators, teachers and
what purchases need to be made this year?
what steps are in place to get the qualification
what support is available.
what systems or applications each person needs to access to do their job
what the arrangement is, so if it is, um,
what the revised codes, um, have come to look like.
what they need to be acceptable
what to do when trained parents/
what values are really important for your playgroup.
what values are really important for your service and community.
what values underpin the service.
what we had heard from the sector.
what we had learned through this was that, um, inadvertently
what you need to know about the revised attendance codes.
what you want to achieve day by day
what you want to achieve day-by-day
what you were saying a moment ago, please?
what's changing when it will land, um,
what's likely you've, uh, you may have already seen them if,
when (time or specific symptoms/circumstances) medicine is to be given.
when (time or specific symptoms/circumstances) the medicine should be given.
when I spoke to the sector about the difference
when a child attends fewer hours than they are enrolled to attend, on a daily basis, on more than half of their enrolled days in a calendar month. Note: this does not apply to sessional services.
when a child attends for fewer days per week than they are enrolled to attend, in more than half of the weeks in a calendar month or
when a child is absent on the same enrolled day or days of the week for more than half of these days in a calendar month or
when a child's attendance is casual or conditional
when a service is closed for renovations.
when and how to apply for a change in funding rate.
when determining the food to serve to
when new services can expect their first funding payment.
when we said about creating these codes.
when you would be marking your, um, your attendance.
where dogs brought at pick-up and drop-off should be tied, for example, not immediately at the gate where children are passing
where possible, allow children to see what is happening outside the centre boundary
where the child is entitled to attend for the enrolled hours on a regular, ongoing basis.
where the safest stops are on the route.
where you can find the reporting and how frequently it will be updated.
where you can go to for further support.
whether or not it is (or will be) a regular, routine part of their daily life for some time to come
whether other children are present who may be distressed by observing the treatment.
whether the existing furniture is suitable
whether they hold a current practising certificate, and its expiry date
whether they will provide meals or ask you to pack lunch for your child.
which I'll have to find the link to that, um,
which both onsite and offsite,
which have all been completely reworked from the ground up,
which is the step attendance response.
which it historically does.
which outlines is the student present?
which part of the enrolment is conditional. It can be the entire enrolment or specific days and/or hours and
which shifts will need to be filled by registered teachers to ensure compliance with the Education (Registration of Early Childhood Services Teachers) Regulations 2004.
which supplement the attendance code decision tree, um,
which will be available soon,
who are representing their region or New Zealand
who have counseling provision within the school.
who have passed on and connections through
who leave eg early EG 2:00 PM Some parents want
who lives at least 3.2km (Years 1-8) or 4.8km (Years 9-13) from their
who run the sessions receive information, support and training from us. Playgroups that are not certificated can open if parents stay with their
who were for example native speakers: this was in order to give the Trust time to establish its own qualification (i.e.
who were not developing in accordance with expected range of development in small children or
who work across more than one eligible service will receive the allowance at a pro-rata rate.
why attendance is important,
why the service was established
why you set up the service
will be down to practice, I guess.
will be required if an activity includes an element of risk. For example, climbing, cooking, using ropes, cords or tools of any kind or activities near water.
will be required if an activity includes an element of risk. For example, climbing, cooking, using ropes, cords or tools of any kind, or activities near water.
will go a great step in the right direction
will investigate your report and let you know if they need more information.
will our staffing needs change?
will use their professional judgement to ensure that the right kind of supervision can be provided. If close supervision cannot be provided for an activity which requires it, then teachers, educators and
windows and other areas of glass
with all evidence required to assess the request, is received by the Ministry.
with attestation have been attested by
with certain qualifications.
with controlled entities must prepare consolidated annual financial statements. They should use the Kiwi Park Group model financial statements.
with expenses greater than $33 million are categorised as tier 1 entities and must provide extra disclosures. Refer to the disclosure checklist for tier 1 school guide.
with mental health related absences?
with principals, um, who you can go to, um, to contact
with regular opportunities to connect with the wider natural environment and materials drawn from nature.
with the additional language skills they require.
with the climate strikes.
with the parents there about the importance of, uh,
with the regulation changes next year, mark.
with the required training on duty at all times (see Section 3-C-3 for licensed playcentre requirements or Section 3-C-4 for
with the written authority (appropriate to the category of medicine) of a parent.
with the, uh, with us via, via chat.
with your student management system, please do reach out
withdraw from children for planned breaks as appropriate
within the guidelines set down by
wooden or plastic hammer board.
work continues to deliver on the 6 priorities, which include the new maths action plan and developing a consistent system of assessment and
work effectively with parents and, where appropriate, family or
work in collaboration with the parents and
work more than 2,080 hours per year.
work to keep children safe from abuse and neglect
work with agencies or charities to support their students. These include:
worked roster or shift arrangements
working together to revitalise and strengthen
works across two services that apply for the allowance, the allowance will be calculated at a pro-rata amount across both services.
works with students, their parents,
written notice advising parents if the home their child is attending will have children receiving out-of-school care and
written parental acknowledgement of the written notice.
years of service in a bilingual and immersion service
you believe that this experience has harmed you in some way.
you can answer, but if you do
you have not been successful getting them back to school.
you have quite a lot of questions.
you know, I think that's an unjustified absence.
you know, so like, um, if I'm student A
you may apply to be funded at the quality rate
you must apply to return to the standard funding rate
you will need to update your enrolment agreement with them.
your child has more than 1 home address because of shared custody.
your child has respite or after school care arrangements
your child has started their final year at school and is assessed as ineligible from a new residential address
your child's immunisation record
your child's school principal
your full name and date of birth
your legal status / registration in New Zealand
