6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:11:3 9 Confidential advice to Government
"2018 - Building Innovation Partnership delivers a ministerial briefing on a Quake Centre initiative to develop a National Digital Infrastructure Model (NDIM).
"Circular economy attributes:
"On three and a half days each year, almost all shops must close under the Shop Trading Hours Act 1990. These are Christmas Day, Good Friday, Easter Sunday, and until 1pm on ANZAC Day."
"holidaysactreviewpapers"
"holidaysactreviewpapersb"
$ (excluding GST) Register and Service Type Unit Cost Proposed fee Proposed levies Proposed total charge Current charge (fee + levy) Change in charge Companies register Name approval 10.85 11.00 - 11.00 10.00 1.00 Company incorporation26** 55.28 55.00 28.00 83.00 91.00 (8.00) Annual return26** 8.62 9.00 28.00 37.00 22.00 15.00 Annual return – API26** 5.90 6.00 28.00 34.00 19.00 15.00 Amalgamation 742.56 745.00 - 745.00 350.00 395.00 Restoration 225.61 225.00 - 225.00 150.00 75.00 Personal Property Securities register Registration/renewal financing statement 7.88 8.00 - 8.00 14.00 (6.00) Registration/renewal financing statement – API 4.87 5.00 - 5.00 7.00 (2.00) Basic search – Internet 1.93 2.00 - 2.00 2.00 - Basic search – API 1.03 1.00 - 1.00 1.00 - Financial statement s (Disclose and Companies registers) Financial statement filing 171.36 170.00 - 170.00 175.00 (5.00) Disclose register Disclose: Managed fund offers Lodgement of product disclosure statement (per fund) 717.36 720.00 - 720.00 521.74 198.26 Add new fund to existing managed fund (limited disclosure) 717.36 720.00 - 720.00 521.74 198.26 Annual confirmation to managed fund (per fund) 717.36 720.00 - 720.00 521.74 198.26 Disclose: Other financial products Lodgement of product disclosure statement (per PDS) 3,749.91 3,750.00 - 3,750.00 2,347.83 1,402.17 Add limited disclosure to other financial product 3,749.91 3,750.00 - 3,750.00 2,347.83 1,402.17 Annual confirmation other financial products (per PDS) 3,749.91 3,750.00 - 3,750.00 2,347.83 1,402.17 Disclose: Managed investment schemes Register managed investment scheme or governing document 1,247.42 1,245.00 - 1,245.00 673.91 571.09 File scheme annual report 295.32 295.00 - 295.00 239.13 55.87 **CO levy $15.00, NZBN levy $12.00, IP levy $ 1.00 .
$ (excluding GST) Register and Service Type Unit Cost Proposed fee Proposed levies Proposed total charge Current charge (fee + levy) Change in charge Friendly Societies register For filing, under section 82(3) of the Act, a copy of a special resolution passed for the purpose of amalgamation or transfer of engagements or conversion into a company. 133.33 135.00 - 135.00 133. 33 1.67 For filing a resolution for conversion of a society into a branch under section 88 of the Act . 177.78 175.00 - 175.00 177.78 (2.78) For any cancellation or suspension of the registration of a society or branch under any of paragraphs (d) to (g) of section 92(1) of the Act . 133.33 135.00 - 135.00 133.33 1.67 For filing an instrument of dissolution under section 94 of the Act . 311.11 310.00 - 310.00 311.11 (1.11 ) Retirement Villages register Registration application 643.05 645.00 - 645.00 782.61 (137.61) Annual return (< 34 units)^ - 370.00 - 370.00 347.83 22.17 Annual return (35 – 84 units)^ 634.91 620.00 - 620.00 565.22 54.78 Annual return (> 85 units)^ - 1,270.00 - 1,270.00 1,130.43 139.57 Insolvency Practitioners register Licence registration 186.21 185.00 - 185.00 165.00 20.00 Annual confirmation 68.45 70.00 - 70.00 105.00 (35.00) Auditors register Registration/renewal of a licence 349.47 350.00 - 350.00 304.35 45.65 Annual confirmation 122.39 122.00 - 122.00 95.65 26.35 ^includes the financial statement filing cost of $170.00 Retirement Villages – Land transfer fees It is proposed that sections 4 (b)(c), 6 (a) -(c) and 7 of the Retirement Villages (Fees) Regulations 2006 are amended to refer to fees charged by the Registrar -General of Land, as set out in the Land Transfer Act 2017, and the regulations thereunder .
$0.63 per $100 of liable earnings
$1.1 billion was from the professional services sector
$1.3 billion was from manufacturing
$1.3 billion was from the hire and property rental sector
$1.39 per $100 of liable earnings
$1.8 billion (just over 16%) was from the primary sector
$10 million ($5,000 per business)
$12 million to fund foodbanks and community food organisations.
$15 million (over 2 years)
$16.2 billion direct, $11.2 billion indirect contribution to GDP
$17.2 billion or 20% of exports
$2.45 million for the second round of the Regional Events Promotion Fund
$3 million for a Regional Tourism Boost
$3 million to secure more business events for New Zealand
$670 million was from the construction sectors
$690 million was from the health care and social assistance sector.
$7.9 billion was held in Te Waipounamu (South Island)
$860 million was from the education sector
$9 million for New Zealand Cycle Trail Fund to enhance the Great Rides
% of invoices paid within 10 business days
'10 Keys for Gender Sensitive OSH Practice - Guidelines for Gender Mainstreaming in Occupational Safety and Health'
'Grow' relates to economic performance. To achieve the standard of living and quality of life for today and for future generations we need a well-performing economy through productive and sustainable use of resources across New Zealand.
'No information given' represents individuals who did not give information on this aspect, or who indicated they preferred not to say.
'Refugees are participating fully and integrated socially and economically as soon as possible so that they are living independently, undertaking the same responsibilities, and exercising the same rights as other New Zealanders and have a strong sense of belonging to their own community and to New Zealand.'
(Delayed from July 2021).
(Delayed from Quarter 3 2021)
(Delayed from Quarter 3-4 2021)
(Do not use this email address for queries about your visa application.)
(Including the Geneva Convention, Convention on Cluster Munitions etc.)
(New slide - the 30 that were identified and emerged as the high scoring products from Stage I into Stage II are spread across a wide range of systems, products, processes, and categories. The table lists the 30 opportunities and Tim Morris and Virginia Wilkinson are in the bottom right-hand corner)
(New slide stating that the project woks to a clear client brief and lists client brief and select key concepts, which are the challenges, purpose of the work and the requirements)
(OIA request) from us, we encourage you to check out our sources of information below as you may find the information you need is already publicly available:
(OSHAA provides that regulations may be made for registration of space objects)
(Overseas): +64 9 952 1663.
(The Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety made a minor amendment to paragraph 9 of the terms of reference.)
(a leap year). An accrual ra t e of 0.00767 would mean that in a 365 - day year an employee would accrue 3.999 weeks (which is just less than four
(a) immediately on publication; or
(a) publication in a fully Open Access journal (i.e., Gold OA); or,
(b) deposit of an acceptable version in a suitable online repository (i.e., Green OA)
(b) where a publisher policy requires an embargo period, immediately at the end of the embargo period or 12 months after the date of such publication, whichever is earlier.
(e) regulations 9 and 10;
(formerly known as Hale & Twomey).
(formerly the Government-funded Centre for Space Science Technology (CSST)), based in Alexandra, which has plans to develop satellite data products to drive regional economic growth.
(hurt and humiliation) of the employee, or the loss of any expected benefit.
(in consultation with your offic e)
(many can be studied/earned under apprenticeships):
(refer paragraphs 14 – 16 above) . We have proposed the same with regards the rules for reducing the divisor for the AWE calculation to account for periods when an employee off work and receivi ng no or reduced pay (refer paragraph 17 - 19 above) . 50.There are a reas where opportunity for simplification may exist and areas where stakeholders are likely to raise a variety of perspectives on the underlying policy. Our proposed approach will provide the opportunity to consider the overall operation of the rules in t his area further . Potential o pportunities for simplification include : Confidential advice to Government Confidential advice to Government 2324 - 2225 13 52. I n 2020 Cabinet agreed that AL payments would be based on the greater of three rates: Ordinary Leave Pay (OLP) (a new calculation to replace the current Ordinary Weekly Pay (OWP) which has been problematic ), Average Weekly Earnings ( AWE ) of the last 52 weeks or AWE over the last 13 weeks. The short run A WE adds a third calculation to the methodology in the Act . Confidential advice to Government Confidential advice to Government 2324 - 2225 14 T he complexity of the rules for determining the use of AL entitlement 59. One of the most problematic areas of the Act is determining the amount of the four-week AL entitlement an employee uses when they take time away from work. Employers and employees must agree on this “based on what genuinely constitutes a working week for the employee”. The lack of prescription and extent of flexibility means that, in the case of employees with work cycles different to seven days (for example shift cycles or nine - day fortnights) or variable hours of work, discretion and judgement must be app lied.
(the ERA)), employment with the outgoing employer ceases at the point of restructuring. It is common for the incoming employer to reach a contractual agreement with the outgoing employer to offer positions to current employees. To the employee, it appears as though their employment has
(with targeted communications) :
) to their analysis of different occupational diseases against the technical criteria.
). You will be asked to provide your name and email address so we can send you future electronic newsletters. When you unsubscribe to our alert or newsletter, your details will be deleted from the database.
* MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, l NOVATION & EMPLOYMENT HIKINA WHAKATUTUKI BRIEFING Interim Report from the Holidays Act Taskforce Date: 14 December 2018 Priority: Medium I Security classificat ion: In Confidence Tracking number: 2081 18-19 Action sought Action sought Deadline Hon lain Lees-Galloway Agree to the proposed two-month 25 January 2019 Minister for Workplace extension to the timeframe with the Relations and Safety Taskforce reporting to you in July 2019 Contact for telephone discussion (if required) Name Position Telephone 1st contact Gerard Clark Employment Standards Policy Manager 04 901 8590 Principal Analyst, Jon Saunders Employment Standards 04 897 7651 The following departme nts/agencies have been consulted Minister's office to complete: Comments D Approved D Noted 0Seen D See Minister's Notes D Declined D Needs change D Overtaken by Events D Withdrawn ✓ BRIEFING MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT HIKINA WHAKATUTUKI Interim Report from the Holidays Act Taskforce Date: 14 December 2018 Priority: Medium Security In Confidence Tracking 2081 18-19 classification: number: I Purpose 1. This is the Interim Report from the Holidays Act Review Taskforce (the Taskforce) which you established in May 2018 to review the Holidays Act 2003 (the Act) and make recommendations for change. Executive summary 2. The Taskforce is making good progress and is currently identifying and developing possible solutions to address the issues with the current Act. The Taskforce expects to be in a position to report back to you with recommendations for change that have been robustly tested in July 2019. This is a slight extension to the anticipated report back date of May 2019 to allow the Taskforce to conduct some additional targeted consultation on its recommendations prior to reporting to you. 3. To date, the Taskforce has published an Issues Paper and received almost 90 submissions on issues with the Act and ideas for change. The Taskforce has considered a number of options for change and has identified two main alternative options for determining and paying leave entitlements. It now intends to test these options with an independent payroll advisor. 4. In addition to its detailed testing with a specialist payroll advisor, the Taskforce also intends to conduct targeted confidential consultation with key stakeholders including a broader group of payroll providers in the first half of 2019. This will ensure that the Taskforce can be confident that its final recommendations are credible, implementable and will meet the objectives of the review ( outlined in Annex One). MBIE view on the proposed extended timeframe 5. MBIE supports the Taskforce's request for a two-month extension to the timeframe and recommends that you agree to it. The additional consultation that the extension would allow for will mean that the Taskforce's recommendations are better informed, better understood by key stakeholders and more likely to resolve current issues without creating any unintended consequences. 6. If the Taskforce did not undertake this additional consultation it is likely that MBIE would seek to do so after the Taskforce reported. The impact on the overall timeframe for making policy decisions on changes to the Act is therefore likely to be minimal. MBIE considers that the two-month extension to the timeframe is justified. Recommended action The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment recommends that you: a Note the attached interim report from the Holidays Act Taskforce Noted 2081 -18-19 In Confidence b Agree to a two-month extension to the review timeframe to allow for additional targeted consultation with the Holidays Act Taskforce reporting to you with its final recommendations in July 2019. Gerard Clark Ho lain ees-Gall ay Manager, Employment Standards Policy Minister foi"-War,k lace Relations and Labour and Immigration Policy, MBIE Safety 14 It I.R ..... I ...... I ..... . {fI .. f!l.-tlg_ 2081 -18-19 In Confidence 2 Background 7. On 29 May 2018, following Cabinet agreement earlier in May, you announced the establishment of a Taskforce to review the Act. 8. The Taskforce comprises BusinessNZ, the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions (NZCTU) and government (MBIE, the State Services Commission and Inland Revenue are all represented) and is chaired by Professor Gordon Anderson, an employment law specialist from Victoria University. MBIE provides the Secretariat to the Taskforce. 9. The Taskforce had its first meeting in July 2018 and has met monthly since then. The Taskforce's Terms of Reference are included as Annex One. As part of Stage One of the review the Taskforce published an Issues Paper in August 2018 10. At its first meeting the Taskforce agreed to the following three-stage process for the review: • Stage One -Understanding the full range of issues with the current Act (including the publication of an Issues Paper to seek feedback from key stakeholders) • Stage Two -Identifying and testing possible solutions (including robust testing of the impact of alternative options on different forms of working arrangements, employers and sectors) • Stage Three -Confirming the preferred option and drafting the Taskforce's recommendations and final report. The Issues Paper set out a number of key issues that employers, employees and payroll providers experience with the Holidays Act ... 11. In late August 2018 the Taskforce published an Issues Paper on MBIE's website which set out its understanding of the key issues employers, employees and payroll providers face in trying to implement the Act. The Issues Paper sought feedback from key stakeholders on whether: • the issues set out in the Issues Paper were described accurately? • stakeholders had experienced any other issues working with the Act that were not captured in the paper? • stakeholders had any suggestions or proposals for change? 12. In recent years a number of issues have been identified with the Act that have made it difficult to implement in practice. In addition to a range of specific issues relating to specific parts of the Act (for example, determining entitlements and payments for annual holidays), there are also some more fundamental, cross-cutting issues. These cross-cutting issues relate to the design of the Act itself and are the cause of many of the perceived problems employers, employees and professional service providers (including payroll providers) face in working with the Act. The main issues in this category are: • the lack of specific prescription in the Act. For example, the Act does not define a 'week' for the purpose of the annual holidays entitlement, which causes difficulties when it is not obvious (for example, if employees work on a roster pattern that does not fit a weekly cycle, or they work variable hours and days from week to week). • the complexity of the Act. There are a number of different calculations for different parts of the Act. Often employers are unclear which calculations should be used and many 2081 -18-19 In Confidence 3 employers are not using the correct calculations at the correct times (or are carrying out the calculations incorrectly). • the lack of clarity. For example, there is insufficient guidance provided to ensure a common understanding of terms such as 'regular' between all parties. It is also unclear how to translate the hours generally used as the base unit of time by payroll systems into the days and weeks as required by the Act, especially when an individual's working arrangements change. 13. In addition to these cross-cutting issues there are a range of specific issues related to those sections of the Act that deal with: • the entitlements to, and payments for, annual holidays. For example, determining what 'a week' is when it is not clear from the working pattern, knowing which method to use to determine payments for annual holidays and how to use it correctly, and using the Pay As You Go provisions inappropriately. • the entitlements to, and payments for, bereavement leave, alternative holidays, public holidays and sick leave (BAPS leave).For example, determining an 'otherwise working day' and determining what payments are included in an employee's 'relevant daily pay' and when 'average daily pay' can be used instead. 14. The Issues Paper set out the issues noted above in some detail and asked for feedback from stakeholders on a number of specific questions . ... and stakeholders generally felt the Issues Paper captured the main issues they experience in working with the Act. 15. The Taskforce received a good response to the Issues Paper with 87 substantive submissions received. The submissions covered a wide range of issues, ranging from a focus on a single specific issue, to comments relating to many aspects of the Act and suggestions for new systems to replace the existing Act. 16. The 87 substantive submissions comprised: • 41 submissions from employers • 13 from payroll practitioners or providers • 14 from individuals • 19 from other groups or organisations (such as law and accounting firms submitting based on their clients' experiences). 17. NZCTU is seeking the input and views of individual trade unions through its own internal consultation process throughout the review. NZCTU then represents the views of these unions in discussions at Taskforce meetings. This process explains the lack of responses from individual trade unions to the consultation on the Issues Paper. 18. The vast majority of submissions (80) felt that the Issues Paper accurately captured the main issues with the current Act. Many suggestions for change were received with some consistent key themes 19. Many of the responses to the Issues Paper made suggestions about how the system could be improved. While there were many detailed submissions with specific proposals, there were a number of key themes that emerged from the submissions. The 'headline' messages that came through from the submissions in relation to any potential changes were: • strong support for a more prescriptive approach (whatever shape this took) • strong support for a simplified system with fewer calculations 2081 -18-19 In Confidence 4 • strong support for an accrual-based system (similar to the Australian system) • strong support for a system based on hours. 20. A more detailed summary of the submissions received is attached as Annex Two. The Taskforce is now considering options to address the issues with the current Act Two main optio1ns are currently being considered ... 21. While the Taskforce has considered a wide range of options for change it is currently considering two main options. Both involve a simplified system for how the payment for all forms of leave should be calculated with alternative systems for calculating an individual's leave entitlement. 22. The first option that is being considered would retain the existing entitlement-based system whereby an employee becomes eligible for 4 weeks of annual leave after 12 months of work but would provide greater clarity about how to calculate leave entitlement for those with unpredictable work patterns. 23. The second option would be based on an accrual system whereby an employee accrues leave from their first day of employment up to the existing entitlement of 4 weeks. 24. Both options would also include a much greater level of prescription about how leave entitlements and payments should be calculated, in particular for those with working arrangements with variable hours and/or pay. 25. The Taskforce has not settled on final versions of these options, and the testing phase will involve assessing a number of sub-options which may produce slightly different results for different types of working arrangements . . . . and these options will be rigorously tested with payroll systems and key stakeholders. 26. The Taskforce is conscious that any new system it recommends must protect employee's entitlements while being capable of being implemented in the New Zealand payroll environment (as set out in the Terms of Reference). The Taskforce is planning a robust testing phase to ensure that it fully understands the implications that different options would have on the entitlements received by employees across different working arrangements, employers and sectors. 27. The Taskforce has contracted a specialist provider to conduct detailed payroll testing and provide independent advice to the Taskforce on the implications these options for change would have for employees, employers and payroll systems. 28. This independent advice to the Taskforce will be supplemented by additional targeted consultation with key stakeholders with a significant interest in the outcome of the review. For example, the Taskforce intends to consult, on a confidential basis, with a broader range of payroll providers in 2019. The groups represented on the Taskforce (NZCTU, Business NZ and the government) will also undertake their own consultation with their own networks. 29. Only once this full series of testing has been carried out and the implications of the different options are well understood will the Taskforce consider its final recommendations. 2081 -18-19 In Confidence 5 The Taskforce will also make recommendations in relation to a range of other issues with the Act. .. 30. There are also a range of other more specific issues relating to the Act which the Taskforce will consider and may make recommendations about. Some of the more substantive issues that the Taskforce will consider include: • Employees who miss out on public holidays because their work pattern does not include 1 a Monday -It has been suggested that employees wh,o do not work a regular 5 day week miss out on the full entitlement to public holidays because when a public holiday falls on a weekday that they do not usually work they do not receive a paid day off. They may also not benefit from any public holiday that falls on a Saturday or Sunday being transferred to a Monday. • The Holidays Act override in the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act (PLEPA) -The PLEPA overrides the Holidays Act so that a person who returns to work after a period of parental leave is entitled to only average weekly earnings for 12 months. This effectively means that annual holidays taken the moment they return are paid $0, which gradually increases over the next 12 months. It has been argued that this approach is discriminatory against parents who have taken parental leave (overwhelmingly women), and contrary to the objectives of the PLEPA (to protect the rights of employees during pregnancy and parental leave). • Taking sick leave for part days -Some employees may only need to be off work for part of a day (e.g. they go home early). The Act is silent on the possibility for part days to be paid as sick leave, but some employers already do this anyway. • Whether a new or revised Act should include requirements in relation to the software to be used for Holidays Act purposes -Adopting this type of approach would be similar to approaches used by Inland Revenue in relation to tax compliance and could provide greater assurance that employers were complying with the Act. Consideration will need to be given to the compliance costs (for both government and employers) of the accreditation or other regulation of software. • The treatment of existing leave entitlements upon the sale and transfer of a business - The Act requires employers to pay out any outstanding entitlements to their employees when employment ends (including when a business is sold or transferred). Despite this, industry practice is often for holidays entitlements (e.g. accrued sick leave, or annual holidays) to be retained by an employee when they are transferred from one employer to another. The Act does not currently provide for this practice . ... before the Taskforce reports to you with its final recommendations in July 2019. 31. When it was established the Taskforce was expected to report to you with its final recommendations within 12 months. While the Taskforce initially planned to report to you in May 2019, it now proposes to report to you in July 2019 to allow time for the targeted consultation with key stakeholders outlined above to take place. 32. The Taskforce considers that the benefits of this additional targeted consultation (which would support the credibility and validity of the final recommendations) justify a minor 2081 -18-19 In Confidence 6 extension to the timeframe of the review. The extension would mean that while the review of the Holidays Act would take longer than the original timeframe, the Taskforce itself (which held its first meeting in July 2018) would report back within 12 months. 2081 -18-19 In Confidence 7 Annex One: Holidays Act Review Taskforce - Terms of Reference Purpose 1. The purpose of the Holidays Act Working Group (the Group) is to make recommendations to Government for a clear and transparent set of rules for providing entitlements to, and payment for, holidays and leave that can be readily implemented in a payroll system and is applicable to an increasingly diverse range of working and pay arrangements. 2. It is important that a customer-focused approach is taken to this review to ensure that recommendations are readily implementable by employers and their payroll providers. Background 3. There is widespread non-compliance with the Holidays Act 2003 (the Act) and it is generally accepted that this is due both to issues with the implementation of the legislation in payroll systems and the business processes that support these, and issues with the legislation itself. 4. The Act works well for a standard, five day, 40 hour week, but can be difficult to apply to more diverse working arrangements and complex remuneration packages . This is primarily because the Act is based on two key principles relating to entitlements and pay: a) that entitlements are determined in relation to the work pattern at the time the leave is taken b) that employees should not be financially disadvantaged by taking leave, that is, they should be paid (at least) what they would have earned had they worked. 5. In these situations , the Act relies heavily on employers making judgements as to how the provisions of the Act apply to the specific circumstances of the individual employees, and in some cases agreement with the employee is required. In some cases, these may need to happen each time leave is requested. 6. The result is an Act that does not provide certainty to employers and employees, is difficult for employees and employers to understand and interpret, is hard to systematise in a payroll system, and can incur relatively high compliance costs for employers. Objectives 7. The Group is required to develop, test and make recommendations to the Government on policy options for the provision of, and payment for, holiday and leave entitlements that: a) continue to promote the existing purpose of the Holidays Act 2003 b) provide clarity and certainty for employers and employees so that employees receive their correct entitlements c) are simpler than the current Act in relation to provisions of, and payment for, entitlements to holidays and leave d) are readily implementable in a payroll system e) minimise compliance costs for employers f) minimise perverse incentives on employers and employees g) ensure the balance of decision-making between employers and employees when it comes to requests for holidays and leave is appropriately calibrated 2081 -18-19 In Confidence 8 h) are readily applicable to the full range of working and remuneration arrangements in the labour market both now and in the future i) aim to protect overall entitlements for employees. Scope and parameters 8. The Review will retain the purpose of the current Act (in section 3) and (at least) the current levels of entitlements ( such as four weeks' annual holidays, five days' sick leave). 9. The Group will consider: a) options to improve both the provision of, and payment for, entitlements that meet the objectives set out in paragraph 7, and: i. where trade-offs between competing objectives are required, will be explicit about how these are made ii. may include consideration of the place of the standard five day, 40 hour, working week in the Act b) any other matters relating to the Act that it sees fit. This may include holidays and leave entitlements modified by other Acts (such as the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act 1987). 10. The principles set out in paragraph 4 may also be reconsidered, but options must aim to preserve the intent of these as far as possible. 11. The Group will not, however, consider the complex issue of remediation of historical underpayments of holiday and leave pay. Membership and Process 12. The Group will consist representatives from MBIE, the State Services Commission and Inland Revenue, along with three to four members each representing workers, employers, led by an independent Chair with the power to commission work. 13. The Group will be chaired by Gordon Anderson, a law professor at Victoria University. The Chair is an independent/neutral party in the Group discussions, whose purpose is to facilitate the parties to reach jointly agreed recommendations to Government. 14. The Group is expected to consult widely to get a comprehensive understanding of the issues with the Act, and draw on international examples of holidays and leave legislation where appropriate. 15. The Group is also expected to work closely with technical experts such as payroll providers, business rules specialists, and service design and delivery specialists to assist with the design and testing of policy options. 16. The Group is required to support their recommendations with quantitative analysis of different options, tested with bona fide payroll data, to ensure that those options are readily implementable and adverse consequences have been identified. 17. The parties agree that consistency of attendees will be important for the Group to achieve its objectives, and will ensure that representatives will not be changed unless this is unavoidable. If any change in representatives is required, the party concerned will ensure the new attendee/s have been well briefed on previous discussions and progress. 18. The parties will each ensure that their constituents/stakeholders have appropriate opportunity to have input into development of options, through the parties' internal governance 2081 -18-19 In Confidence 9 arrangements. MBIE will ensure that appropriate cross-agency structures in place for senior government officials to be kept informed of, and have input into, the work of the Group. 19. MBIE will provide secretariat support to the Group and information and research that the Group identifies is required to facilitate its discussions. Rules of engagement 20. The parties agree that they will: a) work together in good faith, balancing the interests of all parties b) hold discussions in confidence and on a without prejudice basis c) agree any external communications at each meeting. 21. If the parties are unable to reach agreement on recommendations, the Group's final report will outline: a) the areas where the parties have reached agreed recommendations b) the areas of difference . Timing and reporting 22. The Group will report back to the Minister of Workplace Relations and Safety with their recommendations within 12 months. This timeframe will give the Group sufficient time to commission work and undertake robust testing of options. 23. The Group will also provide an interim report after six months, so that Cabinet -and the New Zealand public -can be informed about the Group's progress. 24. Each party will be responsible for reporting to their constituents/stakeholders, in accordance with any messaging agreed during the Group's discussions and as required by their internal governance mechanisms. In doing so, the parties agree to honour the confidentiality of the Group's discussions. 2081 -18-19 In Confidence 10 Annex Two: Summary of submissions on Issues Paper 1. The Taskforce received a good response to the Issues Paper with 87 substantive submissions received. The submissions covered a wide range of issues, ranging from a focus on a single specific issue, to comments relating to many aspects of the Act and suggestions for new systems to replace the existing Act. 2. The 'headline' messages that came through from the submissions were: • Strong support for a more prescriptive approach (whatever shape this took) • Strong support for a simplified system with fewer calculations • Strong support for an accrual based system • Strong support for a system based on hours. Details of submissions 3. 87 substantive submissions on the Taskforce's Issues Paper were received. Of these, 50 were submitted directly to the Secretariat as 'standalone' submissions while 37 were submitted via MBIE's online response form. 4. Along with the 37 substantive online submissions, a further 119 respondents also completed part of the on line response form. As these respondents were either duplicates of other submissions or did not provide any comments (apart from their name and contact details) they were excluded from the analysis. Key themes in submissions 5. The following key themes were raised by submissions on the Issues Paper, with some examples of the specific comments made on each theme. • There are a number of reasons why employers have difficulty complying with the Act, including: o the Act being overly complex with too many calculations o the lack of support or expertise that payroll professionals have o the Act is not 'systematisable' as it requires too many judgement calls. • The problems with the Act affect many different types of employers and employees, such as: o employees who are paid piece rates or commissions, or who work overtime or unpredictable hours o employees who change their pay, role or working patterns o 'non-standard' workers (e.g. gig workers, shift cycles that are not 7 days). • The two broad principles that the Taskforce identified as underpinning the Act (that entitlements should be determined in relation to the work pattern at the time leave is taken, and that employees should not be financially disadvantaged by taking leave) are generally appropriate, although: o the principles may no longer be relevant for all workers o the principles may not be compatible with simplicity o the principles allow employees to 'game' the system and favour the employee over the employer. • There are specific issues relating to the provision of annual holidays and BAPS leave, and there are 'cross-cutting' issues that apply to the Act in general, such as: 2081 -18-19 In Confidence 11 o terms like 'working week' and 'otherwise working day' being unclear o closedowns and the sale/transfer of business can cause problems o the 'Mondayisation' of public holidays can be an issue as employees who do not generally work on Mondays can be seen as missing out on some public holidays o subjective and/or unclear decisions about when to use various calculations o the application of leave entitlements to 'casual' employees. • A number of submissions made comments about the role and function of the Labour Inspectorate, such as: o the Inspectorate should provide more guidance and be more accessible to employers who need support with holidays entitlements o the Inspectorate should have more responsibility for making consistent binding determinations, but these decisions should be able to be appealed. • Along with comments about the problems with the current Act, many submitters provided proposals for changes and suggestions for improvements, including: o using an accrual system where employees accumulate actual time off, rather than a hypothetical 'week' entitlement o providing more guidance on the various terms used in the Act o reducing (or eliminating) the subjective decision points in the Act o reducing the number of different types of payments and calculations o clarifying or simplifying the processes for closedowns, the treatment of casual employees, the transfer of public holidays, alternative holidays and interactions with parental leave o requiring (or allowing) payroll providers to have their payroll software accredited as compliant and approved. 2081 -18-19 In Confidence 12
*Note that the Liability Convention and Outer Space Treaty do not assign liability to states regarding the operation of launch facilities and operation of high altitude vehicles.
+ 28: Renewal of overseas launch licence
+ Over time the NZSA may undertake further conformity assessments of other overseas licences, permits or authorisations with a view to adding to the list detailed in section 1.5 of this policy.
+ Regulation 13 : R equirements for orbital debris mitigation plan
+ Regulation 13 : R equirements for orbital debris mitigation plan 1.4 Policy intent New Zealand has establish ed a policy position and process on how to assess applications for payload permits for operations involving ADR and OOS . This policy considers mitigations for the following risk areas: • Orbital debris mitigation • Security and stability • Liability and insurance .
+ This will also ensure the payloads have a very limited life (1 – 2 years) which further reduces the probability of collision, and that any risk to, or interference with, the operations of crewed spacecraft is eliminated. 1.7 Conditions If a payload permit is granted section 18 of the Act provides that t he Minister may impose conditions on the payload permit or overseas payload permit as necessary . There may be cases where imposing specific permit conditions can mitigate the concerns around payloads that are unable to be tracked an d/or that propose to operate at altitudes above crewed spacecraft. Such conditions may include (but not limited to): + requirements to install a device or beacon that transmits location data ; + requirements to collaborate with other spacecraft operators f or the purposes of collision avoidance; and + requirements to notify the NZSA of any incident or accident involving the permitted spacecraft .
, a reference for managers of mines, quarries and tunnelling operations, to help establish, maintain and promote a strong health and safety culture.
, a staged transition of LAS from MBIE to MEC will begin with the transfer of some key contractual relationships with telephone and video interpreting service providers. By the end of June, it is expected that all remaining contracts will be transferred, guidelines and documentation will be updated, and LAS information will be available on the MEC website.
, and will come into force on
, as well as directing visitors during crisis events or natural disasters.
, employers, workers and unions negotiate in good faith, with access to mediation and dispute resolution services available if they are unable to agree.
, sign it, and return it to
, which allows skilled migrants with qualifications and work experience to apply for residence. Migrants approved under this visa stream can bring their partner and dependent children (if any) with them. In 2016/17:
- As above, a people trafficking awareness-raising resource for government and the community, including what trafficking is, where you might see it, indicators and who to call for help, is under development by the Inter-Agency Trafficking Operations Group. Expected to be published end of 2022 and disseminated early 2023.
- for application and assessment information
- for application information.
- for more information about the Catalyst fund
- for more information about the Horizon Europe.
- for more information about the scheme.
-focused PRO will deliver research while building capabilities and commercial outreach in areas such as artificial intelligence, synthetic biology, aerospace, medical technology and quantum technology.
. Action 26 has been incorporated into Action 9.(Continue to support and contribute to international efforts to address forced labour, people trafficking and slavery through ongoing engagement in multilateral forums.)
. At this time the role of administering LAS will transition from MBIE to the Ministry for Ethnic Communities (MEC).
. Build greater consumer awareness of forced labour, people trafficking and slavery, and identify actions that enable individual consumers to support the human rights of workers.
. Consider amending the Crimes Act 1961 to strengthen provisions for the criminalisation of trafficking in children (under 18 years of age).
. Consider and progress opportunities to prevent and disrupt lower-level offending, such as breaches of employment standards, which can escalate into more extreme forms of exploitation.
. Consider introducing legislation requiring businesses to report publicly on transparency in supply chains, to help eliminate practices of modern slavery.
. Consider opportunities to improve business oversight and practices by parties other than the direct employer, to ensure wider compliance with employment standards.
. Continue capacity-building activities to support the disruption and prosecution of forced labour, people trafficking and slavery.
. Continue engagement with agencies, organisations and forums working to address forced labour and people trafficking in the Pacific.
. Continue to develop information sources for migrants on their work rights and entitlements, including during the recruitment and placement process, and on where to seek support to protect themselves in exploitative situations.
. Continue to support victims to participate in the criminal justice process, including through the provision of appropriate support.
. Develop and deliver bespoke training and capability building programmes with Asia-Pacific border and law enforcement agencies.
. Develop risk indicators and associated information sharing agreements for forced labour, people trafficking and slavery in New Zealand and the Asia-Pacific Region, to support onshore and offshore risk identification, disruption and investigation activities, and victim identification and rescue.
. Facilitate processes for the efficient delivery of support services to victims of people trafficking.
. Identify mechanisms to assist in building greater child safeguarding measures in the Pacific.
. Identify ways to strengthen capacity and capability of social services/agencies in the Pacific to respond to child protection issues such as child trafficking and exploitation.
. If relevant, please include the page URL.
. Implement changes to make it easier for migrant workers to leave exploitative employment, through the development of a new dedicated reporting and triaging function and new temporary visa, which will help to prevent exploitation from further escalating.
. Improve accessibility of information so that anyone who experiences, sees or suspects exploitation knows where and how to report it.
. Improve government procurement practices so that government purchasing more effectively supports good employment and supply chain practices, including combating forced labour and people trafficking from supply chains.
. Leverage and build on bilateral and multilateral agreements and forums to enhance cross-border information sharing and work to prevent forced labour and people trafficking.
. New Zealand citizens can also operate or invest in a commercial sex business.
. Only one PAA is required, which gives access to all the providers on the panel.
. People who perform commercial sexual services are breaching the conditions of their temporary visa and may be liable for deportation.
. Prior to the development of ACC, Aotearoa New Zealand and international workers compensation schemes supported workers who had injuries that developed gradually (including occupational diseases).
. Provide advice, information and training so people working in front-line roles better recognise people trafficking, forced labour and slavery, and take timely and appropriate action to identify and minimise harm.
. Provide information resources and advice to employers to ensure they are aware of their employment and immigration obligations.
. Provide information resources and advice to vulnerable groups so that people in New Zealand know their rights.
. Review and amend, as appropriate, policy and legislative settings to ensure they are fit-for-purpose in enabling the disruption, prosecution, and recovery and confiscation of income derived through exploitation in its wider context.
. Strengthen cooperation between enforcement agencies to support efficient and effective responses to enquiries relating to forced labour, people trafficking and slavery.
. The Ombudsman will decide whether to investigate and review our decision and they may make a recommendation to us.
. This includes partners of a New Zealander or resident, partners of work visa holders and student visa holders. In 2016/17:
. Undertake research and monitoring activity to better understand the nature and extent of forced labour, people trafficking and slavery in New Zealand.
. Work towards implementing the United Nations Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights.
. Work with social sector agencies and non-governmental organisations to help inform exploitation victims of their rights, and opportunities to seek help and assistance.
. Work with system and sector leaders, including business and union representatives, to develop and share tools, resources and information to support assurance of organisational and supply chain work practices, including recruitment processes.
. in Electrical and Computer Engineering and a Bachelor of Commerce in Economics from the University of Canterbury.
1 8shrvakdix 2020 -06-03 14:04:00 iii. Addressed the Terms of Reference set for the review, focusing particularly on enhancing the certainty, transparency, and practicality of the legislative provisions on leave and leave pay.
1 According to analysis from Sapere Research Group conducted in 2015.
1 End- of-life processes include passivation and any disposal manoeuvres
1 End- of-life processes include passivation and any disposal manoeuvres .
1 Family violence leave, Bereavement leave, Alternative holidays, Public holidays and Sick leave. 2 The Taskforce did not decide between the two possible reference periods for the ‘short -run’ average weekly earnings calculation (i.e. four or 13 weeks). I have decided to recommend a 13 week reference period, for reasons set out in paragraph 40. 3 The Taskforce continued to use the term ‘Average Daily Pay’ for this approach to FBAPS leave, despite adopting an hours -based formulation (‘Average Daily Pay’ is defined differently in the current Act). 4 8shrvakdix 2020 -06-03 14:04:00 take a given period of time away from work. For example, if an employee wants to take a paid day off on a Wednesday, what proportion of an employee’s annual leave balance (which is held in weeks) does this ‘day off’ amount to? The prescriptive process agre ed by the Taskforce involves using documentation (e.g. an employment agreement) or a prescribed averaging method to determine leave entitlements and deductions. The latter approach would be used only in cases where an employee’s working week is highly vari able and unpredictable.
1 From June 2020, after which dedicated funding was no longer available, the Labour Inspectorate withdrew from ongoing involvement in a number of payroll cases before the employer ha d completed its remediation process (for example where an employer had calculated but not yet paid arrears and the Inspectorate had confidence that the employer was committed to, and capable of, completing its remediation). As a result, from 1 July 2020 the Inspectorate does not have a complete record of all of the arrears that have been paid by some of the larger employers.
1 Holidays Act 2003 Review – Terms of Reference Purpose 1. The purpose of the Holidays Act Working Group (the Group) is to make recommendations to Government for a clear and transparent set of rules for providing entitlements to, and payment for, holidays and leave that can be readily implemented in a payroll system and is applicable to an increasingly diverse range of working and pay arrangements . 2. It is important that a customer -focus ed app roach is taken to this review to ensure that recommendations are readily implementable by employers and their payroll providers. Background 3. There is widespread non -compliance with the Holidays Act 2003 (the Act) and it is generally accepted that this is du e both to issues with the implementation of the legislation in payroll systems and the busines s processes that support these, and issues with the legislation itself. 4. The Act works well for a standard, five day, 40 hour week, but can be difficult to apply t o more diverse working arrangements and complex remuneration packages. This is primarily because the Act is based on two key principles relating to entitlements and pay: a. that entitlements are determined in relation to the work pattern at the time the leave is taken b. that employees should not be financially disadvantaged by taking leave, that is , they should be paid (at least) what they would have earned had they worked. 5. In these situations, the Act relies heavily on employers making judgements as to how the provisions of the Act apply to the specific circumstances of the individual employees, and in some cases agreement with the employee is required. In some cases, these may need to happen each time leave is requested. 6. The result is an Act that does not prov ide certainty to employers and employees, is difficult for employees and employers to understand and interpret, is hard to systematise in a payroll system, and can incur relatively high compliance costs for employers. Objectives 7. The Group is required to develop, test and make recommendations to the Government on policy options for the provision of, and payment for, holiday and leave entitlements that: a. continue to promote the existing purpose of the Holidays Act 2003 b. provide clarity and certainty for employers and employees so that employees receive their correct entitlements c. are simpler than the current Act in relation to provisions of, and payment for, entitlements to holidays and leave d. are readily implementable in a payroll system e. minimise compliance costs for employers f. minimise perverse incentives on employers and employees g. ensure the balance of decision -making between employers and employees when it comes to requests for holidays and leave is appropriately calibrated
1 Holidays Act 2003 Review – Terms of Reference Purpose 1. The purpose of the Holidays Act Working Group (the Group) is to make recommendations to Government for a clear and transparent set of rules for providing entitlements to, and payment for, holidays and leave that can be readily implemented in a payroll system and is applicable to an increasingly diverse range of working and pay arrangements . 2. It is important that a customer -focus ed app roach is taken to this review to ensure that recommendations are readily implementable by employers and their payroll providers. Background 3. There is widespread non -compliance with the Holidays Act 2003 (the Act) and it is generally accepted that this is due both to issues with the implementation of the legislation in payroll systems and the busines s processes that support these, and issues with the legislation itself. 4. The Act works well for a standard, five day, 40 hour week, but can be difficult to apply t o more diverse working arrangements and complex remuneration packages. This is primarily because the Act is based on two key principles relating to entitlements and pay: a. that entitlements are determined in relation to the work pattern at the time the leave is taken b. that employees should not be financially disadvantaged by taking leave, that is , they should be paid (at least) what they would have earned had they worked. 5. In these situations, the Act relies heavily on employers making judgements as to how the provisions of the Act apply to the specific circumstances of the individual employees, and in some cases agreement with the employee is required. In some cases, these may need to happen each time leave is requested. 6. The result is an Act that does not prov ide certainty to employers and employees, is difficult for employees and employers to understand and interpret, is hard to systematise in a payroll system, and can incur relatively high compliance costs for employers. Objectives 7. The Group is required to develop, test and make recommendations to the Government on policy options for the provision of, and payment for, holiday and leave entitlements that: a. continue to promote the existing purpose of the Holidays Act 2003 b. provide clarity and certainty for employers and employees so that employees receive their correct entitlements c. are simpler than the current Act in relation to provisions of, and payment for, entitlements to holidays and leave d. are readily implementable in a payroll system e. minimise compliance costs for employers f. minimise perverse incentives on employers and employees g. ensure the balance of decision- making between employers and employees when it comes to requests for holidays and leave is appropriately calibrated 2 h. are readily applicable to the full range of working and remuneration arrangements in the labour market both now and in the future i. aim to prote ct overall entitlements for employees . Scope and parameters 8. The Review will retain the purpose of the current Act (in s ection 3) and (at least) the current levels of entitlements ( such as four weeks’ annual holidays, five days ’ sick leave ). 9. The Group will consider: a. options to improve both the provi sion of, and payment for, entitlements that meet the objectives set out in paragraph 7, and: i. where trade- offs between competing objectives are required, will be explicit about how these are made ii. when considering 7(g), may include consideration of the place of the standard five day, 40 hour, working week in the Act b. any other matters relating to the Act that it sees fit. This may include holidays and leave entitlements modified by other Acts (such as the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act 1987). 10. The principles set out in paragraph 4 m ay also be reconsidered, but options must aim to preserve the intent of these as far as possible. 11. The Group will not, however, consider the complex issue of remediation of historical underpayments of holiday and leave pay. Membership and Process 12. The Group will consist representatives from MBIE, the State Services Commission and Inland Revenue, along with three to four members each representing workers, employers, led by an independent C hair with the power to commission work . 13. The Group will be c haired by Gordon Anderson, a law professor at Victoria University. The Chair is an independent/neutral party in the Group discussions, whose purpose is to facilitate the parties to reach jointly agreed recommendations to Government. 14. The Group is expected to consult widely to get a comprehensive understanding of the issues with the Act , and draw on international examples of holidays and leave legislation where appropriate. 15. The Group is also expected to work closely with technical experts such as payroll providers, business rules specialists, and service design and delivery specialists to assist with the design and testing of policy options. 16. The Group is required to support their recommendations with quantitative analysis of different options, tested with bona fide pay roll data, to ensure that those options are readily implementable and adverse consequences have been identified. 17. The parties agree that consistency of attendees will be important for the Group to achieve its objectives, and will ensure that representatives will not be changed unless this is unavoidable. If any change in representatives is required, the party 3 concerned will ensure the new attendee/s have been well briefed on previous discussions and progress. 18. The parties will each ensure that their constituents/stakeholders have appropriate opportunity to have input into development of options , through the parties’ internal governance arrangements. MBIE will ensure that appropriate cross -agency structures in place for senior government official s to be kept informed of, and have input into, the work of the Group. 19. MBIE will provide secretariat support to the Group and information and research that the Group identifies is required to facilitate its discussions. Rules of engagement 20. The parties agree that they will: a. work together in good faith, balancing the interests of all parties b. hold discussions in confidence and on a without prejudice basis c. agree any external communications at each meeting. 21. If the parties are unable to reach agreement on recomm endations, the Group’s final report will outline: a. the areas where the parties have reached agreed recommendations b. the areas of difference. Timing and reporting 22. The Group will report back to the Minister of Workplace Relations and Safety with their recommendations within 12 months. This timeframe will give the Group sufficient time to commission work and undertake robust testing of options. 23. The Group will also provide an interim report after six months, so that Cabinet – and the New Zealand public – can be informed about the Group’s progress. 24. Each party will be responsible for reporting to their constituents/stakeholders, in accordance with any messaging agreed during the Group’s discussions and as required by their i nternal governance mechanisms. In doing so, the parties agree to honour the confi dentiality of the Group’s discussions.
1 I N C O N F I D E N C E 8719r8ar0m 2024-09-03 09:59:26 Confidential advice to Government I N C O N F I D E N C E ECO-24-MIN-0177 6agreed: 6.1to the content of the consultation document, attached to the paper under ECO-24-SUB-0177 for release alongside the exposure draft of the Bill in September 2024; 6.2that officials may make minor and editorial changes to the consultation document before it is released for targeted consultation; 7noted that the Minister intends to report back to ECO in December 2024 on feedback themes and the proposed policy direction. Rachel Clarke Committee Secretary Present: Officials present from: Hon David Seymour Hon Nicola Willis (Chair) Hon Brooke van Velden Hon Louise Upston Hon Paul Goldsmith Hon Tama Potaka Hon Matt Doocey Hon Simon Watts Hon Melissa Lee Hon Penny Simmonds Hon Chris Penk Hon Nicola Grigg Hon Andrew Bayly Hon Andrew Hoggard Hon Mark Patterson Simon Court MP Jenny Marcroft MPOffice of the Prime Minister Office of Hon Brooke van Velden Officials’ Committee for ECO 2 I N C O N F I D E N C E 8719r8ar0m 2024-09-03 09:59:26
1 Operational Policy: Liability, Insurance and Indemnities 1.1 Purpose of this document This is the New Zealand Space Agency ( NZSA ) policy concerning liability insurance and indemnities relating to permitting and licencing assessments and decisions made under the Outer Space and High- altitude Activities Act 2017 ( the Act ) and in accordance with the Outer Space and High -altitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulations 2017 ( the Regul ations ). It explains the provisions in the Act relating to liability, insurance and indemnities and provides guidance on how these provisions will be implemented when assessing applications under the Act and the Regulations 1.2 When to apply this policy This policy will be applied as one of a number of considerations when assessing applications for :  Launch licence s  Payload permit s  Overseas launch licence s  Overseas payload permit s  Facility licence s  High- altitude licence s
1 RDP is defined as what an employee would have received had the worked on the day concerned and includes productivity or incentive- based payments (including commission) and overtime payments the employee would have otherwise received had they worked on the day concerned and the cash value of any board or lodgings provided by the employer to the employee. 2 ADP is a daily average of the employee’s gross earnings (as per the definition in the Act) over the past 52 weeks. This is worked out by: • adding up the employee’s gross earnings for the period, and • dividing this by the number of whole or part days the employee either worked or was on paid leave or holidays during that period.
1 Regulatory Impact Statement – Improving the Holidays Act 2003 (mbie.govt.nz) 6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:12:39
1 See Section C for a breakdown of the estimated number of employees affected. 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:06:16
1 Status quo and problem definition
1 The Bill amends the term ‘Annual Holidays’ in the Act to ‘Annual Leave’ to better reflect the range of purposes for which the entitlement is used (for example to care for dependants, attend to personal matters or if sick, bereavement or family violence leave entitlements are exhausted). 2324- 2225 2 Agree to the following formula to provide clarity about the A verage Weekly Earnings divisor reduction for a part week of unpaid leave: Number of hours of unpaid leave taken in the week (up to the value of the denominator), divided by the employee’s average number of guaranteed hours per seven -day period. Agree Discuss Adjustments to the rules for taking, allowing and requiring AL to reconcile them with an accrual -system Note that the provisions in the Act for taking, allowing and requiring AL are based on entitlement arising after a fixed period, that we consider the current balance of interests is appropriate, and that the proposed adjustments below to reconcile them with an accrual system seek to maintain their underlying intent. Noted Agree that an employer must not unreasonably withhold consent to an employee’s request to take accrued AL entitlement and may also agree to leave in advance of accrued entitlement but does not have to approve a request (this reflects the 2020 Cabinet policy decision on pro- rata leave in advance). Agree Discuss Agree to adjust the provisions for AL an employer must allow an employee to take so that, following the employee’s first 12- month employment anniversary date: • Within each 12- month period an employer must not withhold consent to an employee taking four weeks of accrued AL entitlement (if an employee has it avai lable), and • cannot withhold consent to an employee taking at least 2 weeks of their accrued AL entitlement in a continuous period. Agree Discuss Agree to adjust the provisions for AL an employer can require employees to take so that an employer can require employees to take accrued AL entitlement that is in excess of four weeks but only if: • they have sought to confer with the employee and genuinely tried to reach agreement about when the leave is to be taken and been unable to; or • they have an establ ished annual closedown period and they give the employee at least 14 days’ notice of the requirement to take AL entitlement. Agree Discuss Adjustments to the rules for ‘cashing -up’ AL entitlement to reconcile them with an accrual system Note that an accrual system will require a consequential amendment to the period of 12 months of continuous employment specified in the Act as the timeframe within which an employee can cash up one week of AL and that the proposal below is designed to maintain the policy intent that only one week of AL can be cashed up per year regardless of whether AL has been cashed up in previous years. Noted Agree that, after the completion of the first 12 months of employment , an employee may request to exchange for payment (‘cash- up’) up to one week of AL entitlement in each subsequent 12-month period and that all other supporting provisions related to cashing up AL remain unchanged. Agree Discuss AL in advance during a closedown period Note that, in 2020 Cabinet agreed that, during a closedown period, an employer would not be able to refuse an employee’s request to take AL in advance above the pro- rata amount of leave in advance (or accrued AL under an accrual system) an employee has ‘earned’ and that stakeholders have raised concern about the liability risk this creates for employers . Noted Agree to rescind the Cabinet decision above and maintain the status quo so that, during a closedown period an employer may agree to an Agree Discuss 2324 - 2225 3 employee taking AL in advance, but an employer does not have to allow this. PAYG Note that in 2020 , Cabinet agreed to a new four -part test for paying AL as a regular part of an employee’s pay (pay -as-you - go (PAYG)) and a new requirement to review its use every 13 weeks , that the previous Minister refined
1 The Bill was intended to replace the Act, its name more accurately reflects the purpose s of all leave types it (like the Act) provides minimum entitlements to : annual leave (which employees use for a variety of purposes broader than ho lidays) , public and alternative holidays , and sick, bereavement and family violence leave. 6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:12:15 I N C O N F I D E N C E 2 I N C O N F I D E N C E administration. Making significant changes at this time would extend the timeframe for policy development and legislative drafting before an exposure draft could be released. 8 I also intend to use the exposure draft consultation document to seek feedback on alternative policy options in some areas . The exposure draft consultation would be a good opportunity to gain feedback on whether more substantial shifts from the previous Government’s decisions are needed and merit extending the timeframes for delivering completed legislation. I believe that seeking feedback from the various stakeholders who are impacted by the legislati on, including those who work with it on the ground, will be the most effective way of ensuring the Bill we introduce is robust and will resolve the longstanding issues . 9 I will bring a separate Cabinet paper seeking agreement to release the consultation document . After consultation, I intend to report back to Cabinet in December 2024 following analysis of stakeholder feedback on the exposure draft and may seek further poli cy decisions at this time. Depending on the nature of feedback and the extent of changes proposed , I intend that a Bill will then be introduced in May 2025. Background 10 The Act sets out an employee’s minimum entitlements to annual holidays , public holidays and sick, bereavement and family violence leave and the rate of payments for them . There are longstanding and well -known compliance issues with the Act (summarised in Appendix One) , to which p roblems with the Act itself are a core contributor . The issues have resulted in significant costs for employers as a result of remediat ing historical underpayments and implement ing system change s to support future compliance. This has impacted both the private and public sectors. 11 While the Act largely works for those employees who have traditional working hours, it is not fit for purpose and is complex to apply in the context of modern and constantly evolving working and remuneration arrangements. 12 In May 2018 , Cabinet agreed to establish a tripartite Holidays Act Taskforce , comprised of government, business, and union representatives , to recommend improvements to the Act [CAB -18-MIN-0250]. Of the 12 members , six were unions, two were Business New Zealand representative s, MYOB was the only payroll provider representative , and Bell Gully the only legal expert . In contrast with this approach, I believe it is important to seek input and feedback from a wider range of payroll providers, legal experts and small businesses to reinforce th is Government’s commitment to the workability of legislation . 13 In March 2020 , Cabinet agreed to endorse the Taskforce’s 22 recommendations in full as the basis for a substantially amended Act [CAB -20-MIN-0100 refers] . The approach to reforming the Act agreed by Cabinet in 2020 retained its underlying framework2 but included new detailed processes and prescriptive methodologies. While these were intended to provide more certainty about how to calculate entitlements, they do not simplify the Act.
1 Where a service or activity is provided and charged to a group of individuals that all benefit from it as a ‘club good’. 2 A memorandum account is used by government to monitor expenditure and revenue from third -party fees and levies, usually over a five -year period, to ensure that large fluctuations in fee amounts are avoided over time and that the overall balance trends tow ards zero. This memorandum account’s purpose is limited to the administration of legislation providing for the registration and provision of documents and information services for businesses and other registry services. Section 2 of this document outlines the function and status of the Companies Office memorandum account. 7 and other significant IT system upgrades can no longer also be absorbed within the current Companies Office budget . The cost model has incorporated savings in MBIE support cost as part of the government -wide savings initiative included in Budget 2024. Increasing compliance and enforcement work The Companies Office has m onitored an increase in non -compliance relating to the Companies register. As a result, it should u ndertake more compliance and enforcement work in response to the growing complexity of non -compliance, including increasing director prohibitions and related Court proceedings . The Companies Office must also begin a programme of information and education to inform stakeholders ( eg registry users – entities that are registered on one of the Companies Office registers) about recent legislative changes and their impacts ( eg the introduction of the Incorporated Societies Act 2022) as well as undertake related compliance and enforcement wor k in those areas . Without further expenditure in these areas there is a risk that the Companies Office may not be able to take appropriate action, which could lead to a loss of integrity to the system and potential harm to the community. Likely future infrastructure cost pressures The Companies Office anticipates that o ver the next three -to-five years, aging systems require maintenance and improvement to ensure it continues to offer quality service delivery ( eg improvements are planned to the Disclose register). MBIE also has a medium -term technology strategy to move from capital -based information technology (IT) systems to Software as a Service (SaaS) subscription -based services.3 Improvements to Companies Office register IT systems will focus on maintaining economies of scale within the base IT infrastructure to ensure that benefits are realised within any future significant changes to the registry system. However, any significant future transformation of the Companies Office registry system would include public consultation as part of the business case development and consider any impacts on cost recovery settings. What is within the scope of the review? All fees and levies collected from third parties by the Companies Office across the registers set out in Figure 1 are within the scope of this review, with some exceptions.4 These registers are grouped according to two purposes. Figure 1: Registers in scope of the review Entity registers that record entities formed • Companies • Incorporated Societies • Limited Partnerships • Friendly Societies • Credit Unions • Building Societies
1 day per week deliveries to the remainder of delivery points.
1 eg. the licensed builders regime, which contains complementary roles for the Registrar of Licensed Building Practitioners, th e Building Practitioners Board, and the chief executive of MBIE, in whose name prosecutions of non -licensed builders are taken. 2 Cabinet manual para 3.16 (a) states “In their relationship with Ministers, officials should be guided by a "no surprises" pri nciple. They should inform Ministers promptly of matters of significance within their portfolio responsibilities, particularly wher e these matters may be controversial or may become the subject of public debate.” Title: Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines Date of Issue: July 2018 Security Classification Unclassified Version: 1.1 Review ed June 2024 Approved By: Chief Legal Officer Owner: Chief Legal Officer Page 4 of 16 c. decide whether it creates a new or substantial risk that needs to be reported to the Solicitor - General under the Solicitor -General’s Prosecution Guidelines .3 5.4 Where a person has disclosed a conflict of interest, that person must usually cease further involvement in the prosecution process. 5.5 The independence of a prosecutor is not compromised merely by the fact that they have provided advice at the investigative stage, unless they are likely to be a witness. 6 Prosecution decision making 6.1 Threshold for prosecution No prosecution may be commenced unless it meets the two part test set out in the Solicitor - General’s Prosecution Guidelines : a. Evidential sufficiency: there is available and admissible evidence sufficient to provide a reasonable prospect of conviction; and b. Public interest: Prosecution is required in the public interest.4 A prosecution decision in accordance with the Prosecution Policy and these procedures and guidelines must be made in every case where a breach of any Act, regulation, or other legislative instrument (which is enforceable by an offence provision) has been investigated , there is evidenc e to suggest a prima facie case, and there may be public interest in proceeding to a prosecution. For some relatively minor or technical breaches of the law it is acknowledged that there may be no obvious public interest in a prosecution and that individua l business unit’s enforcement strategies may provide for the use of other enforcement tools to achieve compliance . A formal prosecution decision in accordance with the Prosecution Policy is not required in this case, however the decision (and the relevant enforcement tool used) shou ld still be recorded by the business unit. 6.2 Investigator’s role When MBIE investigators investigate a suspected breach of any Act, Regulation or other instrument that may meet the requirements for prosecution, it is the responsibility of the investigator to prepare the file for referral to a prosecutor for review before the formal prosecution decision is made or confirmed by the relevant prosecution decision maker. The file should include copies of the evidence available (including evidence that may support an available defence), and clearly identify any issues that may go toward weight (including credibility) or admissibility. The file should also include all relevant information as to matters going to the public interest assessment . 6.3 Legal review Legal revi ew must be carried out by a prosecutor. This review is an integral independent check within the process. It is significant, not only in respect of reviewing the technical aspects of individual cases, but also in ensuring the efficient, effective and timel y management of cases generally. Review is a continuing process, and all prosecutors are required to take account of any change in circumstances in any prosecution. Accordingly, there needs to be a close and effective liaison
1 https://www.employment.govt.nz/a ssets/Uploads/d53229842c/holidays -act-2003 -guidance -holidays - leave -.pdf
1 https://www.employment.govt.nz/a ssets/Uploads/d53229842c/holidays -act-2003 -guidance -holidays - leave -.pdf 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
1. Complete the REPF Application Form
1. Develop our sovereign space capabilities with a national space mission
1. Earning, taking and paying annual leave Description Analysis of Option Two (compared to Option One) Earning annual leave (AL) Current Act: • Employees are entitled to four -weeks AL , arising after '12 months continuous employment'. An employee is not entitled to access any AL until the date their AL entitlement arises. Option One: • Four weeks AL entitlement would continue to arise after 12 months continuous employment, but an employer would not be able to unreasonably withhold consent to an employee’s request to take ‘AL in advance on a pro -rata basis’. Option Two: • Employees would accrue four weeks AL from the start of employment at a rate of not less than 0.0768 weeks per week of em ployment. There would be a clear set of parameters to support the operation of the system and adjustments to other parts of the AL provisions to reconcile them with an accrual -based system. Taking AL Current Act: • Employers are required to agree what portion of AL entitlement is used for a period of AL based on ‘what genuinely constitutes a week for the employee’ each time leave is taken. Option One: • When determining the use of AL entitlement for an employee who h as guaranteed hours of work, an employer would be required to carry out an audit to assess whether the employee’s actual hours were 20 percent or more than their guaranteed hours. If they were, the employer must use actual hours to determine use of AL enti tlement for a period of AL. • To determine the number of hours an employee who does not have clear daily hours would have worked on a day of leave , an employe r would have to calculate the average number of hours an employee had worked on the same calendar d ay in the previous 13 weeks (‘the calendar methodology’). Option Two: • There would be no ‘audit requirement’ and where an employee has guaranteed hours of work AL calculations w ould always be based on those. The ‘ calendar day methodology’ would be replaced with a calculation based on an average of an employee’s hours of work across all days of work in the previous 13 weeks . Paying AL Current Act: • The rules for paying AL as a regular part of an employee’s pay (Pay -as-You-Go or PAYG) lack clarity and require the application of discretion and judgement. Option One: • There would be a four-part test to define an ‘intermittent or irregular working pattern’ for the purpose of assessing an employee’s eligibility to be paid for AL using PAYG. Employers would have to review eligibility every 13 weeks. Option Two: • The four -part test would be replaced with objective criteria for using PAYG and the 13-week review period would be extended. Clear and simple + + Earning leave • Option Two would simplify the end -to-end system for providing a nd paying AL entitlement, and better support common practice with a clear set of parameters to provide clarity around the operation of a week -based accrual system for employers, payroll and employees. Taking leave • A single methodology for employees with guaranteed hours will simplify the Bil l and provide clarity and certainty for both employers and employees. • Replacing the ‘calendar day methodology ’ with an average across all days is simpler and easier to understand as it does not require a separate calculation for each individual day of leav e in a pay period. Paying leave • Objective criteria will remove the need for employers to apply judgement (which Option One would still require) , thereby creating greater certainty and clarity. Readily implementable + + Earning leave • An accrual -based AL system would align with the way many payroll and accounting systems already account for AL entitlements. Employers a nd payroll would not be required to differentiate between different ‘pots’ of AL an employee has earned. Taking leave • Removing the audit requirement for employees with guaranteed hours reduces administrative burden and compliance costs associa ted with completing an audit. • Removing the ‘calendar -day methodology ’ removes the requirement for businesses to have integrated ti me and attendance and payroll systems to support the new rules. Payroll providers indicated that most payroll systems, particularly those used by small businesses, ar e currently only configured to store total hours for a pay period rather than a breakdown of daily hours of work and leave. Paying leave • Removing the requirement to apply employer judgement to determine if criteria are met for PAYG means that the criteria could be systematised. Under Option One, the 13 -week review period would impose high comp liance costs on employers. A longer review period will reduce administrative burden and compliance costs. Flexible and future proof + Earning leave • The adjustments to the rules for rules for taking, allowing and requiring AL to be used to reconcile them with a weeks -based accrual system are deigned to maintain the current degree of flexibility around employer and employee rights and obligations. Paying leave • Greater certainty around eligibility for PAYG will make the criteria easier to apply to a range of employment situations. A l onger review period would provide greater flexibility around using PAYG as it will avoid short seasonal fluctuations in wo rk triggering a requirement to stop using PAYG. Fair for employers and employees + Earning leave • Adjustments to reconcile other AL provisions with weeks -based accrual are designed to maintain the underlying intent of the current provisions and maintain the current balance of interests. The parameters are designed to ensure an employee will have accrue d four weeks AL after the same period as they would be entitled to it under Option One. Taking leave • The benefit of removing the audit function and using actual rather than guaranteed hours (Option Two) is a subjective assessm ent. If an employee’s hours of work vary significantly from their guaranteed hours, using guaranteed hours would mean an employee u ses more entitlement for a part week of AL compared to if actual hours were used, but that would translate to higher pay for the part week of AL. The exposur e draft will provide the opportunity to test the fairness, practicality and outcomes of this approa ch. • MBIE does not consider that removing the ‘calendar day methodology ’ will have a significant impact on leave entitlement and payment calculations. An employee’s average hours worked on a calendar day would only vary significantly from their average acr oss all days when, despite not having agreed daily hours, the employee does have a discernible pattern of work whereby they work more hours on average on some cale ndar days than others. The exposure draft will provide opportunity to test for any unintended consequences. Paying leave • PAYG criteria will be designed to reflect the underlying intent of the Option One criteria - to ensure that an employee who receives PAYG does genuinely work on an intermittent basis and have periods away from work. The review period will be longer than 13 weeks but will still ensure that there is a framework to support the review of its use during employment , which is missing from the current Act. 6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:12:39
1. In May 2018, the Minister of Workplace Relations and Safety established a tripartite Taskforce comprising government, New Zealand Council of Trade Unions and BusinessNZ to review the Holidays Act 2003 . The purpose of the review is to make recommendations t o Government for a clear and transparent set of rules for providing entitlements to, and payment for, holidays and leave . Any new system needs to be able to be implemented in a payroll system , and apply to an increasingly diverse range of working and pay arrangements while aiming to protect overall entitlements for employees . 2. In order to provide recommendations to Government, the Taskforce must have a comprehensive understanding of the issues with the current legislation. To assist with this task, the Task force has developed this paper which summarises the key issues with the Act as understood by the group. While this paper focuse s on issues that arise from the legislation itself, it also includes discussion of the problems these i ssues create for employers , employees and payroll providers in trying to implement the Act. 3. The Issues Paper seeks the following feedback from key stakeholders : o from your perspective, are the issues outlined in this paper described accurately ? o are there any other issues you have experienced in working with the Act? If so, what are these issues? o do you have any suggestions or proposals for change? 4. The paper begins with a brief overview of the history of holidays’ legislation and some background info rmation relating to the current review. This is followed by a brief overview of the Act itself (Section 2), a discussion on who is affected by issues with the Act (Section 3) and a summary of the key issues identified by the Taskforce (Section 4). The paper conclude s with some ideas for change (Section 5) and intended next steps (Section 6). 5. The key questions we would like your feedback on will be posed throughout the Issues Paper. They are also collated following Section 6 on page 23 . History of the Holidays Act 1.1 6. The Bank Holidays Act 1873 was New Zealand ’s first holidays legislation, which stated that banks should shut on Christmas Day, Boxing Day, New Year’s Day, Good Friday, Easter Monday and the sovereign’s birthday. This was shortly followed by legislation extending paid statutory holidays to all employees. 7. For many years, p rovision of paid annual holidays in addition to statutory holidays to groups of workers was piecemeal, and depended largely on the collective bargaining power of individual unions. The first comprehensive piece of legislation regarding paid annual holidays was the Annual Holidays Act 1944 , which granted the right to two weeks’ paid holiday for all employees . This was increased to three weeks in 1974 and four weeks in 2007. 8. In more recent times, significant reviews of holidays ’ legislation were undertaken in 2001 and 2009 . The 2001 review resulted in the 2003 Act, replacing the Holidays Act 1981, and the 2009 review resulted in a series of amendments in 2010. 9. These reviews had similar objectives, namely to make the legislation easier to understand and apply and to make it more applicable to a wider range of working
1. The Government has put legislation in place to regulate space and high -altitude activities conducted in New Zealand and by New Zealanders overseas. The Outer Space and High - altitude Activities Act (the OSHAA Act) was passed into law o n 10 July 2017 and will com e into force on 21 December 2017. 2. The objectives of the OSHAA Act are to: • facilitate the development of a s pace industry and provide for its safe and secure operation , • implement certain international obligations of New Zealand relating to space activities and space technology, including those found in the Outer Space Treaty , • manage any potential or actual liability that may arise from the space industry , • establish a system for the regulation of space activities and certain high -altitude activities , and to • preserve New Zealand’s national security and national interests .
1. The Parties ...................................................................................................................................... 3 2. Background ..................................................................................................................................... 3 3. Shared objectives ........................................................................................................................... 4 4. Commitments ................................................................................................................................. 4 5. Legislation to establish permanent Māori spectrum entity ............................................................ 5 6. The new Māori Spectrum Entity ..................................................................................................... 6 7. Legal Effect ..................................................................................................................................... 6 8. Shared principles ............................................................................................................................ 6 9. Spectrum Allocation ....................................................................................................................... 7 10. Funding ........................................................................................................................................... 7 11. Tahua Tautoko (accelerated industry investment initiative) .......................................................... 8 12. Ka Hao Māori Digital Technology Fund (Ka Hao Fund) ................................................................... 8 13. Working together on spectrum policy ............................................................................................ 8 14. Statutory and contractual obligations ............................................................................................ 9 15. Non-exclusive relationship ............................................................................................................. 9 16. Representations .............................................................................................................................. 9 17. Conﬁdentia lity ................................................................................................................................ 9 18. Review and variation of MOU ....................................................................................................... 10 19. Dispute resolution ........................................................................................................................ 10 20. Term of Memorandum of Understanding .................................................................................... 10 21. Definitions in this Memorandum of Understanding ..................................................................... 11 22. Signatories .................................................................................................................................... 12 Appendix A: Historical background of radio spectrum .......................................................................... 14 Appendix B: Process for future spectrum transfers and renewals ........................................................ 15 Appendix C: Initial spectrum allocations to the Māori spectrum entity ................................................ 17 Appendix D: Operational processes for working together on spectrum policy ..................................... 18
1. This paper seeks agreement to the recommendations of the Holidays Act Taskforce as the basis for an amended Holidays Act.
1.1 Purpose of this document This is the New Zealand Space Agency ( NZSA ) policy relating to applications for Active Debris Removal or On-Orbit Servicing missions made under the Outer Space and High -altitude Activities Act 2017 ( the Act) and in accordance with the Outer Space and High -altitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulations 2017 (the Regulations ). It sets out the approach that will be taken by the NZSA when assessing applications under the Act . 1.2 This operational policy should be read alongside the operational policy on orbital debris mitigation plans. When to apply this policy This policy will be applied when assessing applications for active debris removal (ADR) and/or on -orbit servicing (OOS) m issions (including demonstrations) : + Payload permit + Overseas payload permit . 1.3 Relevant sections in the Act The Act allows the Minister to impose conditions on payload operators in relation to (among other things) : • managing New Zealand’s liability under international law • protecting New Zealand’s national security and other national interests • avoiding potentially harmful interference with the activities of others in the peaceful exploration and use of outer space .
1.1 Purpose of this document This is the New Zealand Space Agency (NZSA ) policy relating to the recognition and assessment of the orbital debris mitigation plans ( ODMP ) required for launch licence and payload permit applications made under the Outer Space and High- altitude Activities Act 2017 ( the Act) and in accordance with the Outer Space and High -altitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulations 2017 ( the Regulations ). It sets out the approach that will be tak en by the NZSA when assessing applications under the Act. 1.2 When to apply this policy This policy will be applied when assessing applications for: + Launch licence + Overseas launch licence + Payload permit + Overseas payload permit . 1.3 Relevant sections in the Act and Regulations The Act requires the Minister to be satisfied that the applicant has an orbital debris mitigation plan ( ODMP ) that meets the prescribed requirements. The relevant sections in the Act are: Launch Payload Overseas Authorisation + 8(2): Appl ication for launch licence + 9( 1)(c) : W hen launch licence may be granted + 12: R enewal of launch licence + 24 (2) : Appl ication for overseas launch licence + 2 5(1)(c) : Wh en overseas launch licence may be granted + 16(2) : Application for payload permit + 17 (1)(b) : W hen payload permit may be granted + 33 (1)(b) : W hen overseas payload permit may be granted + 51: Minister may take into account authori sation granted in country other than New Zealand
1.2 Key Limitations or Constraints on Analysis There are a number of limitations and constraints relating to this Regulatory Impact Analysis. These include:  Only the main annual holidays options developed and tested by the Holidays Act Taskforce are included in the options analysis. Variations from these, or other proposals not considered by the Taskforce (for example, the portability of leave between different employ ers), have not been considered.  The issue of remediation of historical underpayments of annual holiday and leave pay was not included in the analysis, but formed part of the problem definition. This is in line with the scope of the Holidays Act Taskforce’s work.  There has not been wide consultation on the Holidays Act Taskfor ce’s recommendations. The lack of comprehensive consultation with stakeholders constrains MBIE’s ability to fully understand the impacts and costs of various proposals. Estimates of impacts and costs have been derived from the payroll testing conducted on the options and relevant survey data.  The payroll testing dataset included , by design , a large overrepresentation of employees with varied and unpredictable working arr angements as these employees are most likely to be impacted by changes to the Act. However, as the data used was disproportionately skewed towards less common working arrangements , it cannot be directly extrapolated to the wider New Zealand workforce . The data was also based on employers from one geographi c area (the lower North Island) and, while covering most sectors, did not include all occupations.  The Taskforce eliminated an accrual -based approach to annual holidays (Option Two) as an option part way t hrough payroll testing because it could leave a small number of employees worse off when compared to the status quo . As a result, it was only tested using an early payment methodology that predates the Taskforce’s final recommended payment calculations or the payment calculations outlined in this analysis. MBIE has not had the time to conduct this additional payroll testing.  There is a lack of New Zealand data on annual holidays and leave entitlements and their use more generally . In combination wit h how pa yments can be impacted by when the leave is taken and the uncertain nature of how a new Act could influence behaviour , it is difficult to quantify the status quo and estimate the fiscal impacts of the options . 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:06:16
1.3 Policy background The Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, Including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies (the Outer Space Treaty ) and the Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects (the Liability Convention) assign liability to a State party for damage s caused by space objects that ar e launched from its territory or by its nationals overseas. A space object may include launch vehicles (such as rockets), payloads (such as satellites) and component parts thereof. When more than one launching state is involved, states are jointly and se verally liable. As a launching state, New Zealand has: • absolute liability for damage caused by its space objects on the surface of the Earth or to aircraft in flight (i.e. during launch or re -entry into the atmosphere); and • fault -based liability for damag e caused in -orbit.
1.4 Policy intent New Zealand has establish ed a permit ting process for payloads . From time to time we receive payload permit applications for payloads smaller than 1U . The small size of these payload s means that they are more difficult to track using current space situational awareness ( SSA) systems. Tracking of objects smaller than 1U is possible but is dependent on a number of factors such as altitude, design features or radar cross section. The ability to detect and track objects in orbit is increasingly necessary for effective SSA and Space Traffic Management (STM ) as the number of payloads (and population of orbital debris) continues to grow.
1.6 Verifying compliance NZSA will consider: + the alignment of the ODMP with the CONFERS “Guiding Principles for Commercial Rendezvous and Proximity Operations (RPO) and On -Orbit Servicing (OOS )” + whether the risk and hazard analysis has considered all likely risks, and sensible mitigations are in place + the planned communication methods and frequency + how information will be communicated to potentially affected parties in the event of an anomaly including provisions for consultation with other states in the event of potential accidental harmful interference. Further information Where an application is incomplete, contains deficiencies or inconsistencies, or in any other way fails to satisfy the requirements of the Act and Regulations, further information will be requested from the applicant. Th is may occur at any point during the application and assessment process. 1.6 Conditions The Minister may impose conditions on the licence or permit in relation to ADR/OOS missions. Such conditions may include, but not be limited to: + Requirement that payloads launched from New Zealand comply with relevant regulations of the state that has jurisdiction over the object being serviced or removed + Prohibition of any remote sensing capabilities of these payloads from being used to collect data on third -party satellites + Notification of any change, expiry or revocation to a licence, permit or authorisation treated by the Minister as satisfying New Zealand’s orbital debris mitigation requirements + Notification of deviations from the planned orbi tal trajectory + Notification of any incident or accident ( eg a conjunction, near miss or collision), or notification of debris associated with the object, including details of that incident or accident + Notification of initiation of re -entry or other end -of-life processes 1.
1.6.2 Payloads that cannot demonstrate trackability equivalent to a 1U object may be permitted in some circumstances if they operate below th e orbits of crewed spacecraft (typically 400km)
1.6.2 Where an application is made and an overseas authorisation has not been assessed as meeting New Zealand’s requirements for an orbital debris mitigation plan, applicants will need to demonstrate that the ODMP provided with the application is compliant with regulation 13 . In this case the NZSA will assess the applicant ’s ODMP by reviewing the technical information required, including e nsuring the relevant analyses are carried out with a suitable tool and approp riate inputs .
1.6.3 Where an application is made for an overseas hosted payload, the applicant is required to submit the ODMP for the carrier payload and the hosted payload . NZSA will assess these in accordance with either 1.6.1 or 1.6.2, whichever is applicable. Further information Where an ODMP is incomplete, contains deficiencies or inconsistencies, or in any other way fails to satisfy the requirements of the Act and Regulations, further information will be requested from the applicant. This may occur at any po int during the application and assessment process. Where our verification process revels a potential non -compliance with the standards using DAS or DRAMA, we may request the applicant to undertake a high -fidelity assessment as per section 1.5 of this policy. Where an applicant is unable to show compliance with New Zealand’s regulation 13, no launch licence, overseas launch licence, payload permit , or overseas payload permit may be granted. 1.7 Waivers The regulations do not permit a waiver to be issued if th e ODMP does not meet New Zealand’s regulatory requirements. 1.8 Conditions The Minister may impose conditions on the licence or permit in relation to orbital debris. Such conditions may include, but not be limited to, requirements to notify the NZSA of: + Any change, expiry or revocation to a licence, permit or authorisation treated by the Minister as satisfying New Zealand’s orbital debris mitigation requirements + payload deviations from the planned orbital trajectory + any incident or accident (e.g. a conjun ction, near miss or collision), or notification of debris associated with the object, including details of that incident or accident + initiation of re -entry or other end -of-life processes 1.
10 8shrvakdix 2020 -06-03 14:04:00 iii. The Taskforce’s recommendation to change how annual holidays payments are calculated for employees returning from parental leave is explained in paragraphs 24 -28 of this paper. A mid -range estimate of the cost of implementing this approach would be approximately $42 million per year for employers across New Zealand.
10 AL wou ld accrue during any period an employee was on paid leave, unpaid sick, bereavement or family violence leave, parental leave, voluntary military service leave or was not working while receiving weekly accident compensation. AL entitlement would also accrue on the first week of any other period of unpaid leave but, unless the employer and employee agree otherwise, not on weeks beyond that. The Bill also provides clarity around the definition of ‘unpaid leave’ to mean a period during which an employee would b e required to work under their employment agreement but are absent without pay with the agreement of both the employer and employee. 11 When it is agreed that AL will accrue during weeks in a period of unpaid leave beyond the first week, the AWE divisor would b e reduced by that number of weeks. 12 The formula would be: Number of hours that the employee did work in the week unpaid leave was taken (up to the value of the denominator), divided by the employee’s average number of guaranteed hours per seven -day period, multiplied by 0.0768. 13 The formula would be: Number of hours of unpaid leave taken in the week (up to the value of the denomina tor), divided by the employee’s average number of guaranteed hours per seven -day period . 6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:12:15 I N C O N F I D E N C E 15 I N C O N F I D E N C E Adjust ments to reconcile other AL provisions with an accrual - based system Provisions in the Act that set out employees’ rights to take AL and when an employer may require an employee to tak e AL The provisions a re based on AL entitlement arising after a fixed period and require adjustments to reflect an accrual -based framework. In summary the current provisions are:
10 Do you agree with the description of the issu es relating to annual holidays set out on pages 17 -18 and in Annex Two? If not, why not?
10 For a total budget of $4 2.854 million , which includes $0. 811 million of Crown funding . 11 Companies, incorporated societies, limited partnerships , friendly societies, credit unions and building societies registers. 21 This levy allows for a more transparent distinction between the cost of providing specific services and the costs that are shared by all registers, so that users and consumers have an accurate understanding of what they are paying for. What costs would the levy be applied to Of the approximately $42 million expenditure to be recovered from third parties , approximately $11 million (2 5 percent of the budget) has been identified as shared costs that could be recovered by the levy.12 A proposed CO levy amount has been developed by dividing this cost by an estimated annual volume of 72 4,376 (representing registrations and annual return filing on the entity registers). To determine what costs would be recovered from the CO levy, we considered the shared costs that make up the foundation of a registry system. The types of shared costs are: • personnel costs for the Companies Office senior management team and education and information team; • property leases and maintenance; • depreciation; • capital charge; and • MBIE functional support.13 How the levy revenue would be allocated to registers and impact fees The revenue collected from entity register users will be applied to shared (system support) costs across the Companies Office registers, except for services which are recovered from other specific levies . The remaining direct costs to provide specific services within each register will be recovered by register fees proposed in Section 5 . Analysis of options considered for applying a levy We considered other options for applying a registry system levy under the Companies Ac t: • Charging the levy each time any user (of any of the registers) is required to pay a fee: this option is not proposed because it is not as equitable as charging alongside an annual return or filing fee . Requiring payment of the levy with all fees would see some users paying the levy more than once a year because they access more services requiring a fee. For example, a company may have to pay a levy when it first register s on the Companies register as well as paying the levy for being registered on the FSP register , and then for each time it subsequently registers a security interest on the PPSR . • Not introducing a levy: this option is not proposed as it will not allow the Companies Office to separate the costs of providing specific services clearly and efficiently from shared costs, making it inequitable for smaller registers by continuing the current fee -based approach f or each register. Smaller registers (like the Friendly Societies register and the Incorporated Societies register) and any new , smaller registers would not benefit from the advantage of economies of scale due to their low volumes, a nd as a result are likely to pay significantly higher fees. This option is unsustainable and does not meet the intent of amendments to the
10 Relevant legislation , regulations and standards d. Crimes Act 1961 e. Criminal Disclosure Act 2008 f. Criminal Procedure Act 2011 and Criminal Procedure Rules 2012 g. Evidence Act 2006 h. Search and Surveillance Act 2012 i. Sentencing Act 2002 j. Summary Proceedings Act 1957 k. Employment Relations Act 2000 l. Employment Court Regulations 2000 m. Solicitor -General’s Prosecution Guidelines n. Crown Law Media Protocols for Prosecutors 11 Measures of success and compliance management 11.1 The Manager Legal Services (Litigation) will assess the effectiveness of this policy based on the following measures of success: a. All prosecution decisions comply with the Solicitor General ’s Prosecution Guidelines , this policy, and the Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines b. the outcomes of prosecution decisions (as reported annually by the Public Prosecutions Unit of the Crown Law Office) reflect MBIE prosecutions are well managed c. continuous improvement to Prosecution Procedure and G uidelines to incorporate the comments and expectations of the court 11.2 The Manager Legal Services (Litigation) will monitor compliance with this policy as follows: a. Embedding procedures requiring two or more people input before pro secution decisions are made Title: Prosecution Policy Date of Issue: July 2018 Dep Sec Sponsor: [Insert Deputy Secretary Title] Version: 1.1 Last Review: February 2024 Policy Owner: Chief Legal Officer Policy Classification : Operation al Next Review : February 2027 Security Classification: Unclassified Page 6 of 6 b. Deploying tools such as checklists or other education to help inform staff and managers of their relevant obligations 11.3 Compliance information regarding the performance of this policy will be provided to the relevant business gro up and the Compliance Centre of Excellence on a quarterly basis . 12 Non -compliance 12.1 Failure to comply with this policy may be considered a breach of the Code of Conduct . 12.2 Any action taken as a result of a breach of any of the obligations set out i n this policy will be conducted in good faith, a fair process will be followed, and the person involved will have a full opportunity to respond to the concerns or allegations and have access to appropriate support, advice or representation.
10 Section 2: Companies Office funding The objectives of the Companies Office The Government has set a priority to grow economic prosperity and foster a dynamic, productive and competitive economy . MBIE promotes this vision through its strategic intention of working towards the outcome of a dynamic business environment that foster s innovation and international connections.5 In delivering registry services, the Companies Office has two main objectives: • to facilitate the ease of doing business in New Zealand by providing easy -to-use registers and easily accessible information; and • to maintain confidence in the registers it administers through a focus on integrity and taking enforcement action where this is necessary. The Companies Office contributes to protecting New Zealand businesses and consumers by building confidence and helping to keep the market free from entities and individuals who do not comply with the law. Well -functioning and trusted markets are essential to ensure an efficient and transparent New Zealand business environment that in turn helps grow New Zealand for all.6 In managing all its registers, the Companies Office aims to provide customer -focused, fair, regulatory -driven registers that are supported by quality management systems and focused on excellence. Its approach to compliance is risk and evidence -based, with a preference to educate first wherever possible. Current revenue and expenditure The total current budget of the Companies Office is approximately $37 million per year of which approximately $0.8 million is funded by the Crown. This leaves approximately $3 6 million per year to be recovered from fees and levies. Table 1 on the next page shows the types of costs incurred and the revenue collected by each register since the last review in 2017.
10 Theme Recommendations 22. Employers and employees should have the ability to agree to arrangements that are different to those in the Act , providing that it can be demonstrated that these arrangements provide the employee with leave entitlements that, at a minimum, mee t the standards set out in the Act .
10. Funding 1) The Crown will contribute funding (exclusive of GST) as follows: a) $2M already provided by TPK , b) $5.8M appropriated as part of Budget 2021, c) $32M to be appropriated through Budget 2022 (timing to be confirmed), d) $25M funding for Tahua Tautoko (accelerated industry investment initiative) , subject to further agreement as described in clause 11 of this M OU. 2) Funds are subject to Cabinet decisions , Parliamentary appropriation approvals, and funding agreemen ts signed by the parties to this M OU and/or any entity receiving any funding . 3) If funds are disbursed prior to the establishment of the MSE, it is anticipated that these will be paid to the IMSC under agreed funding arrangements with the IMSC . 4) There will be no further expectation on the Crown to provide any further funding other than as set out above.
10. Note that the Holidays Act 2003 binds the Crown as will any amendme nts to that Act
10. The costs to the G overnment of implementing the changes in payroll systems are also expected to be substantial. As noted in the September 2022 final report back to Cabinet on the All of Government Payroll Programme to improve government payroll systems, many government agencies’ payroll systems are bespoke and aging, and already struggling to adapt to ongoing changes [GOV -22 - MIN-0036].
10. The issues that the Act poses for employers, employees and others are well documented. While it provides some prescription around determining pay for holidays and leave, there remains a high degree of ambiguity in situations when remuneration arrangements are complex. Many employers also have difficulty calculating entitlements as the legislation does not always prescribe how these are to be provided. The result is that current provisions generally work for a standard five day, 40 hour week, but pose a number of issues when applied to more diverse working arrangements and variable pay structures.
10XXXX; 190302; 190310; 2601XX to 2603XX; 2605XX to 2699XX
11 8shrvakdix 2020 -06-03 14:04:00 Implications for Government as an employer and funder of contracted services
11 Are you aware of other issues relating to annual holidays ? If so, what are they?
11 Current leave payment process
11 From the date of the prosecution decision to disposal of the prosecution. 12 Cost billed or to be billed for external prosecutions. Leave blank for in -house prosecutions.
11 The agreed test was that: employer must stop using PAYG if, at the three-month review, the employee has worked 10 hours or more on average per week over all the weeks in the review period, or the employee has performed work during six or more of the weeks in the review period (unless they have also had a continuous period of more than four weeks without work). 2324 - 2225 11 general eligibility threshold for PAYG and promote the actual taking of AL whenever possible .12 40.While they would provide greater certainty, th e objective test and 13-week review requirements are complex, and drafting was challenging . A 13-week review period would also impose high compliance costs and onus on employers . In addition, it would mean that if an employee’s hours of work passed the threshold in one 13 - month period PAYG would have to stop indefinitely even if that was not a recurring work pattern . We recommend a less restrictive and simplified framework for using PAYG 41.In cases where working arrangements are variable, and an employee genuinely has periods when they do not work, PAYG is a simple and fair way for employers to provide an employee with their AL entitlement. It avoids the need to determine what constitutes a w eek in these situations and
11. New Zealand could choose to meet its proposed TSA obligations through a contract with Rocket Lab. However, legal advice supports the view that the TSA obligations will require domestic legislation within a reasonable time of concluding the TSA so that New Zealand can Restricted 7yr8upqmdi 2016-06-08 10:27:02 s 6(a) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Restricted ensure full compliance with our TSA obligations. Legislation is also required to give effect to other international Space Treaty obligations that New Zealand is party to but has not previously had to ensure compliance with because we have not had a space launch industry. 12. For the purposes of the RIA we have defined the status quo as: Rocket Lab wishes to launch space objects in New Zealand; the New Zealand Government is negotiating a TSA with the US Government to enable Rocket Lab to access the necessary US technology. Once the TSA is concluded, signed and brought into force it will create obligations on the New Zealand Government to protect and ensure the secure use and management of sensitive US technology; once rocket launches commence from New Zealand (either by Rocket Lab or any other launch operation that might establish in New Zealand) we will need to discharge our other existing international obligations that we have previously signed up to and manage the liabilities that arise from those agreements; and without a regulatory regime for space launches there is no way we can ensure full compliance with those obligations or manage the liabilities. Problem definition 13 . The problem with the status quo is that New Zealand cannot: ensure full compliance with the proposed TSA and other international obligations; adequately manage the liability to the Crown that arises from our international obligations; manage national security risks related to space objects (launch vehicles and satellites); and be assured that safety and environmental risks arising out of space launches can be managed. Compliance with the TSA and other international obligations 14 . Legislation is required to fully meet obligations proposed in the TSA, as well as obligations arising from a number of international outer space treaties. There are five international treaties on outer space law, three of which New Zealand is already party to, and two to which we will need to accede. Technology Safeguards Agreement (TSA) 15. The draft TSA imposes a number of obligations on New Zealand relating to the use and secure management of sensitive US technologies. For example Article VI (2) requires that the New Zealand Government must ensure that only people authorised by the US Government access launch sites, equipment, and data in segregated areas. Outer Space Treaty 16. The Outer Space Treaty on principles governing the activities of states in the exploration and use of outer space including the moon and other celestial bodies. New Zealand is party to this Treaty). The Outer Space Treaty creates a number of obligations. For example, each country that is party to the agreement bears international responsibility for its national activities in outer space. Countries must ensure that the activities of private entities in outer 7yr8upqmdi 2016-06-08 10:27:02 s 9(2)(h) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Restricted space require authorisation by the State and are subject to ongoing supervision. We can’t meet this obligation under the status quo. Rescue Agreement 17. The Rescue Agreement relates to the rescue of astronauts, the return of astronauts and the return of objects launched into outer space. New Zealand is a party to this Treaty and is able to meet its international obligations under the status quo through existing law and protocols put in place by the New Zealand Police to guide their operational response to an incident. Registration Convention 18. The Registration Convention requires registration of objects launched into outer space. New Zealand is not currently a party but should accede as registration of space objects is integral to a New Zealand-based space launch programme. Cabinet approval will be sought separately. Moon Agreement 19. The Moon Agreement governs the activities of states on the moon and other celestial bodies. New Zealand is not currently party. So far only a small number of countries (13) have signed and ratified the Moon Treaty since it came into force in 1984. We consider that more analysis is required to understand the obligations that arise from the Moon Treaty and to determine if New Zealand should accede to the Treaty. This is not a priority relative to putting in place a regulatory framework for space launch activities. New Zealand’s liability 20 . The Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects is the main international Treaty relating to liability associated with space objects. New Zealand is a party to this Treaty. In general the States participating in a launch (which includes a State from whose territory a space object is launched) are jointly and severally liable to pay compensation for any damage their space objects cause to other parties, or to third States, on the surface of the Earth, to aircraft in flight, in the air, or in outer space. 21. In some circumstances liability is absolute, unless it can be shown that a claimant State was grossly negligent or intended damage to be caused. In other circumstances, liability is apportioned on the basis of fault. A State that has paid compensation following an incident causing damage may seek indemnification from other parties involved in the launching. National security risks Re stricted 7yr8upqmdi 2016-06-08 10:27:02 s 9(2)(h), s 9(2)(f)(iv) s 6(a) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Restricted Safety Risks 24 . Rocket launches and satellites create safety risks. For the most part safety will be dealt with under existing domestic law (e.g. the Health and Safety at Work Act 2015 from 4 April 2016) which creates general obligations on space launch operators. In additional, there are specific obligations, such as the requirement for secure and segregrated areas and accident areas, that arise out of the TSA relating to safety and therefall fall within the scope of New Zealand’s international obligations. Legal advice is that regulation is needed so that New Zealand can ensure full compliance with these TSA obligations. 25. There may also be particular safety concerns that arise from high-frequency launches or particular payloads which over time may require a more proactive approach to safety. Given the relative novelty of rocket launches in New Zealand knowledge of where these risks might arise cannot be anticipated and hence we cannot be assured that the status quo, which in this case is reliance on existing law, will be sufficient. Environmental Risks 26 . Local authorities have responsibility and powers under the Resource Management Act to authorise and manage the land use activities associated with, and effects on the environment arising from, rocket launches. While for the most part it can be expected that the RMA is adequate to address environmental risks, some risks might arise that are beyond the jurisdiction of the RMA. These could include risks to the environment in space. As with safety risks, the relative novelty of rocket launches in New Zealand and indeed the development of knowledge internationally of environmental risks in space, means that we cannot be assured that reliance on existing law will be sufficient. Policy Objectives 27 . Based on the problem definition, the following policy objectives describe the outcomes that we are seeking to achieve with respect to a legal framework for space launches. These have been agreed with the Minister of Economic Development:  The development of safe, secure and responsible space activities (this includes addressing national security, safety and environmental risks but in a way that allows the development of a space industry in New Zealand).  Meet our obligations arising from the TSA related to the use and secure management of sensitive US technologies.  Meet our obligations arising from international outer space treaties that New Zealand is party to or will need to accede to once space launches commence.  Manage New Zealand’s liability that arises out of our existing international obligations. 28. It is essential the legal framework does not inhibit the development of a space launch industry. As part of the policy development process, an assessment of the economic benefits of the development of a space launch industry in New Zealand was undertaken by Sapere Research Group. This estimates the benefits to New Zealand from the development of a space launch industry to be in the order of $750m to $1.550bn over 20 years. The potential for further upside benefits is great. The benefits identified by Sapere include: 7yr8upqmdi 2016-06-08 10:27:02 s 6(a) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Restricted significant economic development opportunities from the growth in scale and critical mass of Rocket Lab’s supply industries, including 3D printing, carbon composites and engineering; increased employment and salaries in Rocket Lab’s supply industries and Rocket Lab as it scales up its launch activities; increased numbers of international visitors to watch rocket launches leading to increased demand for accommodation and other services particularly in the Mahia region; construction activity and infrastructure improvements in the Mahia Peninsula related to the development of the space launch facility; and significant but unquantified benefits from the reputational effects of being a first mover in the development of low-cost high-frequency space launches . Options and impact analysis 2 9.The following options have been assessed in terms of whether they wholly or partly meet the policy objectives: Option 1: Do nothing (status quo); Option 2: Non-regulatory option, specifically a contract with Rocket Lab or any other space launch or satellite operator; Option 3: Develop a regulatory regime for space launches (Option 3A is to develop a standalone regime; Option 3B is to modify existing law). 30. Doing nothing is not an option as it would mean that New Zealand is in breach of its international obligations, cannot shift liability to those who create the risks and are best placed to manage them, does not alow New Zealand to protect national security, and may not be adequate to address safety and environmental risk. We have not undertaken further analysis of this option as it does not achieve any of the policy objectives. Restricted 7yr8upqmdi 2016-06-08 10:27:02 Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Restricted Assessment of how each feasible option meets the policy objectives 31 . The analysis of how each option meets the policy objectives is set out below. Does it meet our international obligations?Does it enable safe and secure launches from New Zealand?Does it manage liability risks? Non- legislative option (contract)
11. These challenges with the Act, combined with poor implementation i n payroll systems and the business processes that support them, have led to widespread non- compliance with the legislation. As at June 2019, arrears had been calculated in respect of 84 of the 155 completed investigations undertaken by the Labour Inspecto rate into non -compliance with the Act. Arrears (which can include underpayments going back several years) have ranged from an average $29 per affected worker in one organisation, to around $8,000 per affected worker in another organisation. In total, aroun d $90.4 million has been paid to 116,000 employees 2 8shrvakdix 2020 -06-03 14:04:00 across numerous organisations. This total remediation figure is expected to grow substantially over time, particularly when payments made by District Health Boards are incorporated.
11.3 Agency appearances In-house prosecutors may instruct a suitably qualified Departmental or Crown entity prosecutor from another agency to appear on a prosecution in certain circumstances, or use local Crown solicitors to act as a gents for list appearances or sentencing etc. The prosecutor will consult with the investigator and relevant manager before instructing out. Factors to be considered include the nature, complexity and importance of the appearance, its location, and cost. In any such case the in -house prosecutor will brief counsel acting about the file. 11.4 Reporting following disposal of prosecutions The prosecutor must, within five days of the completion of the prosecution, provide a prosecution report to the investigator or other person in charge of the file on the result. This report must be in Title: Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines Date of Issue: July 2018 Security Classification Unclassified Version: 1.1 Review ed June 2024 Approved By: Chief Legal Officer Owner: Chief Legal Officer Page 12 of 16 the form of the “Return on Prosecution” form annexed t o these Guidelines and Procedures and must be copied to the Manager Legal Services – Litigation. For in -house prosecutions, the individual prosecutors are responsible for reporting the disposed prosecution (and related hours, disbursements and costs), to the designated administrator in legal branch, to allow monthly reporting to the Public Prosecutions Unit at the Crown Law Office. Where business units have briefed out prosecutions to Crown Solicitors, the business unit is responsible for providing the r eport to the legal branch administrator. Where any oral decision has precedent value or contains a contentious ruling relating to the determination of a point of law that may be subject to appeal, the prosecutor should request the Court to have the decisi on typed up. 12 Appeals 12.1 The defendant or MBIE may appeal the following decisions of a Court: a. a pre -trial ruling (with leave of the Court) b. a sentence imposed c. a ruling by the trial Court (on a question of law, with leave of the Court) d. bail e. orders relating to na me suppression and f. a costs order. However, under the Cabinet Directions on the Conduct of Crown Legal Business 2012 and the Solicitor -General’s P rosecution Guidelines , MBIE (or a Crown Solicitor) must obtain the Solicitor - General’s consent to appeal any decision of a court (except bail decisions which are within the authority of Crown solicitors). 12.2 Defendant Appea ls Any external prosecutor who receives notice of an appeal filed by a defendant, in a case originally prosecuted for MBIE by that prosecutor must immediately inform the instructing MBIE employee. This includes conviction appeals. Any in house prosecutor who receives notice of an appeal filed by a defendant must immediately inform the Manager Legal Services – Litigation. The business manager or Litigation Manger will discuss the appeal with the pro secutor who appeared on the prosecution and the prosecution decision maker before deciding whether to oppose the appeal. For prosecutions taken by in house prosecutors the prosecutor or Litigation Manager will instruct a Crown Solicitor to represent MBIE on appeals in accordance with the Cabinet Directions on the Conduct of Crown Legal Business and the Crown Solicitors’ Terms of Office. 12.3 MBIE Appeals No appeal (other than a bail appeal) may be filed on behalf of MBIE, whether by a MBIE prosecutor or by exte rnal counsel unless the prior written consent of the Solicitor -General has been obtained. The usual time frame for filing an appeal in the appropriate Court is within 20 working days of the decision being made. The relevant business unit manager or prose cutor may initiate a request for approval to appeal. The initiator of the request is responsible for forwarding urgently to the Litigation Manager the following material: Title: Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines Date of Issue: July 2018 Security Classification Unclassified Version: 1.1 Review ed June 2024 Approved By: Chief Legal Officer Owner: Chief Legal Officer Page 13 of 16 a. the decision to be appealed (or, in the case of an oral decision that has not been transcribed: the prosecutor’s notes of the decision, to be followed by a typed transcript of the notes as soon as possible) b. a statement of the proposed ground(s) of appeal and details of the alleged errors in the judgment c. any written submissions for the Ministry or the defendant and d. an outline of the importance to the Ministry of conducting an appeal and any risks in doing so. This information should be provided to the Litigation Manager as soon as possible but at the latest within five working da ys of the decision to be appealed. The decision on requests for the Solicitor -General’s consent to appeal will be made by the Litigation Manager in consultation with the business unit manager and the prosecution decision maker and prosecutor who appeared on the prosecution. This decision should be made by the Litigation Manager no later than five working days after receipt of the file. Where the Litigation Manager agrees an appeal is appropriate, he or she will facilitate the request for approval to Crown Law (on behalf of the Solicitor General), with the assistance of the Prosecutor who appeared on the prosecution. If the Solicitor -General consents to the appeal being filed, the appeal will be dealt with by either Crown Law or by a Crown Solicitor (depen ding on the circumstances). 12.4 Outcome of appeals On receipt of the appeal judgment, counsel appearing on an appeal must forward a copy immediately to the relevant investigator or business unit manager, the in -house prosecutor (if relevant) and the Litigation Manager. For a sentence appeal, the counsel must complete a report on the case in the standard Return on Prosecution format and provide it within five days to the relevant business unit and Litigation Manager.
111 TXT service (for people with hearing or speech difficulties)
12 8shrvakdix 2020 -06-03 14:04:00 Disability Perspective
12 Proposed l eave payment process
12 The costs that are related to the IP oversight scheme and the NZBN register will not be recovered from the CO levy as they are recovered from levies in their own right . 13 Unlike the NZBN levy and IP levy which recover the costs of discrete functions, these shared costs do not have fixed unit costs. Instead, the CO levy is set, and the levy revenue is then applied to these shared costs. 22 Companies Act in 2022 to provide for the benefits of a system approach to running registers by introducing a levy . Table 4 below shows how these two options do not meet all the principles of cost recovery when compared to the proposed approach of an annual levy on entity registers. Table 4: Analysis of proposals for applying a CO levy against principles of cost recovery
12 e. New Zealand is at an early stage of the shift to more circular economy ; there is emergent activity in sustainable businesses and communities New Zealand’s economy, like most other countries, is not very circular. We are one of the highest generators of waste in the OECD, with an average of 700kg per person sent to municipal landfills in 2021 . Our research estimated that less than 1% of materials that flow into the New Zealand economy are recovered through recycling. There is a growing nich e of businesses adopting circular practices . Organisations such as the Sustainable Business Network have been supporting circular business practices for many years. Their Circular Economy Directory lists 129 organisations and has had 3 4,000 users since 2019. Many circular businesses remain small and have difficulty scaling in an economic system and business environment that is stil l fundamentally linear. Product end -of-life considerations tend to be the focus for many businesses wanting to be more circula r. Reinventing products and designing out waste in the first place has been less prominent but is growing. Regional initiatives using circular practices are emerging in New Zealand, particularly in the bioeconomy. For example, North land’s Ngawha Innovation and Enterprise Park is a collaborative hub for business and process innovation, focussed on kaitiaki, circ ular economies, employment opportunities and regional capability development. Communities are involved in networks supporting avoidance of w aste and circular approaches; these include Para Kore, Zero Waste Network, New Zealand Food Waste Champions and Rep air Café Aotearoa. Modest government investments have supported these initiatives while the circular concept is beginning to be embedded in some areas of government policy. Source: Impacts of circular approaches on emissions, jobs, and other factors
12 months after the commencement date.
12% growth in Family work visa holders
12. Ka Hao Māori Digital Technology Fund (Ka Hao Fund) 1) The Parties to this MOU agree that the transfer by TPK of the remaining balance of the Ka Hao Fund ($17.8 million) will commence either upon the introduction of the legislation to the House or before the end of t he 2022 calendar year, whichever comes first. The details of the transfer and future administration of the fund are to be agreed between MSWG and TPK. 2) The fund ing in clause 10 above is exclusive of any funds transferred from the Ka Hao Fund.
12. To help address these issues, Cabinet agreed in May 2018 to establish a Taskforce to review the Act and suggest recommendations for change [CAB -18-MIN-0250 refers]. The tripartite group was comprised of government, union and business representatives, and was chaired by Professor Gordon Anderson, an employment law specialist from Victoria University. The Taskforce was provided with approximately a year to provide its final report.
121 payload permits have been issued to 87 different organisations, including:
13 8shrvakdix 2020 -06-03 14:04:00 Endorse the unanimous recommendations of the Holidays Act Taskforce 1. Note that in May 2018, Cabinet agreed to establish a Taskforce to review the Holidays Act 2003 and suggest recommendations for change [CAB -18-MIN-0250 refers]
13 Are you aware of other issues relating to BAPS leave ? If so, what are they?
13 Improving enforcement programme ($ 2.0 million) $2.0 million will be applied to enforcement activities and programmes across the suite of registers that help to encourage market compliance and combat harmful phoenixing and other poor business practices : • Further funding will allow an increase in enforcement against companies and directors who are not complying with the law, which will have a positive impact on the marketplace . • New and amended legislation will result in a widening of enforcement activities that will need to be undertaken by the Companies Office Integrity and Enforcement Team. For example, the new Incorporated Societies Act 2022 includes an expanded suite of enforcement tools which will require additional full -time positions to be effectively administered. New provisions within th is Act are more aligned with those set out in the Companies Act 1993 (the Companies Act), spanning infringement notices and prohibition of office holders through to prosecution . • There has been an increase in the complexity of matters referred to the Registrar of Companies relating to director prohibitions, which provide protection for the public from company directors who have been dishonest , incompetent or irresponsible. More high - profile directors of multiple companies are being prohibited where mismanagement has resulted in company failures. There has also been a significant increase in the number of prohibited directors seeking to overturn decisions via a ppeal proceedings in th e civil registry of the High Court. This has led to increased legal expenditure as Crown Law must be engaged to act on behalf of the Registrar of Companies . • Criminal prosecutions carried out for the Registrar of Companies have also increased in complexity, impacting legal expenditure. More time is spent on preparing matters for Court, as well as extended hearing and trial durations. Table 2 on the next page details how the additional expenditure would be allocated across the registers as well as how much of it would be recovered through fees and levies . It compares this to the current budget and the scenario where the current budget would be split across the proposed new levies and existing fees with no increase .
13 Media comment 13.1 Publishing the nature and outc ome of enforcement actions draws attention to the consequences of violating the law. It is a valuable tool for both educating duty holders and deterring non-compliance . 13.2 However, public statements concerning prosecutions and investigations must be treated with particular care. 13.3 The general expectation is that relevant business unit will provide a spokesperson and prosecutors will not make any public comment. 13.4 In communicating with the public through the media in relation to a prosecution, MBIE staff will act in accordance with the Crown Law Media Protocol for Prosecutors, News Media Policy and will act in a way that: a. does not prejudice the right to a fair trial b. supports the administration of justice and the integrity of the criminal justice system c. respects the principle of open justice and d. treats the victims of crime with courtesy and compassion , and respects their privacy. 13.5 MBIE will publicise the outcome of a prosecution where it considers it appropriate. This will be managed by the releva nt business unit manager together with the communications and legal teams. Title: Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines Date of Issue: July 2018 Security Classification Unclassified Version: 1.1 Review ed June 2024 Approved By: Chief Legal Officer Owner: Chief Legal Officer Page 14 of 16 14 Civil Proceedings relating to prosecution action 14.1 Civil proceedings arising out of a prosecution, will be managed as follows: a. any application or other civil action against MBIE in th e District Court that arises in the course of a prosecution must be managed by the relevant prosecutor or Crown Solicitor instructed on the prosecution and b. any application or other civil action against MBIE in the High Court that arises in the course of a prosecution or enforcement action (including judicial review) must be managed by the MBIE Prosecutor, Crown Solicitor and/or the Crown Law Office. 15 Diversion 15.1 Where MBIE business units operate a diversion scheme it is important that - a. there are clear guidel ines on when the scheme should be used and the criteria for making any decision as to whether to offer diversion b. the diversion scheme is publicly available (eg. in the compliance and enforcement part of MBIE’s website) c. the scheme is not mentioned to potent ial defendants during the course of an ongoing investigation (which could impact on the admissibility of evidence) d. the existence of the scheme is not taken into consideration until a decision to prosecute has been made and charges laid e. the diversion decisi on maker is independent of the investigator who prepared the prosecution f. the decision to offer diversion is consistent with the Solicitor -General ’s Prosecution Guidelines , and in particular the public interest test, and takes into account the views of any victims. 16 Related documents 16.1 Prosecution policy 16.2 Declaration of Interest policy 16.3 Delegations policy 17 Help 17.1 If you have questions about t hese procedures, talk to your manager in the first instance. 17.2 Managers should seek advice from the Auckland Legal Manager, or Manager Legal Services – Litigation. 18 Appendices 18.1 Appendix 1 – Roles under Procedure and Guidelines Role Responsibilities Investigator • Investigates suspected breaches of relevant Act, Regulation or other instrument • Responsible for preparing file for referral to a prosecutor for review • Ensures the file contains all relevant evidence, identifies issues going towards weight, credibility and Title: Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines Date of Issue: July 2018 Security Classification Unclassified Version: 1.1 Review ed June 2024 Approved By: Chief Legal Officer Owner: Chief Legal Officer Page 15 of 16 admissibility, and includes all relevant information in relation to the public interest assessment • Prepares disclosure for prosecutor review and assists prosecutor with disclosure obligations. Prosecution Decision Maker (within business unit) • Reviews file and assesses in accordance with the Prosecution Policy , these Procedure s and Guidelines and the Solicitor -General’s Prosecution Guidelines • Advises investigator (or investigator’s manager) if further inquiries or information are necessary or if the file is to a satisfactory standard • Makes prosecution decision • Records and places on the case file the reasons for the decision to prosecute or not • Where a decision is made to issue a written warning or to offer diversion, reasons for that decision must also be placed on the case file. Prosecutor • Reviews file and evidence to ensure that the Tests for Prosecution ( evidential sufficiency and public interest) set out in the Solicitor -General’s Prosecution Guidelines are met • If not satisfied that the test for prosecution has been met, the prosecutor provides a written recommendation to the prosecution decision maker that a decision of ‘no prosecution’ should be made • If satisfied that the test for prosecution has been met, the prosecutor documents and confirms this to the prosecution decision maker who will make the ultimate decision whether to initiate prosecution. Manager Legal Services – Litigation • This role is referred to in various places in procedures eg: clause 2 provid ing legal advice around conflicts of interest . Chief Legal Officer and/or Business Unit Manager • This role is referred to in various places in procedures eg: Responsibilities around conflict of interest – clause 2.
13 Section 1: Introduction 16. In May 2018, the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety established a tripartite Taskforce comprising government (the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) , State Services Commission and Inland Revenue) , the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions , and Bu siness New Zealand , to review the Holidays Act 2003 (the Act) . Professor Gordon Anderson, an employment law specialist from Victoria University, chaired the Taskforce and MBIE provided Secretariat support . 17. The purpose of the review was to make recommendat ions to Government for a clear and transparent set of rules for providing entitlements to, and payment for, holidays and leave . 18. This report begins with relevant background information and a summary of the process the Taskforce followed (Section 1) . This i s followed by a brief overview of the issues with the current Act (Section 2), a summary of the feedback received from stakeholders on the Issues Paper published by the Taskforce in August 2018 (Section 3) , and an overview of the options that the Taskforce developed and tested in the review (Section 4) . Section 5 sets out how the Taskforce assessed these options and made its decisions , while Section 6 sets out the Taskforce’s final recommendations. Summary of the review 19. It has become apparent in recent y ears that there is a high level of non -compliance with the Act. While it generally works for a standard, five day, 40 hour week, the Act can be difficult to apply to more diverse working arrangements and complex remuneration packages. Non-compliance has re sulted in many employees not receiving the correct remuneration for their entitlements and employers spending significant resources on both remediating historical underpayments and complying with the Act. 20. The Taskforce that was established for the review was required to develop, test and make recommendations to the Government on policy options for the provision of, and payment for, holiday and leave entitlements that:  continue to promote the existing purpose of the Holidays Act 2003 , which is to promote bal ance between work and other aspects of employees’ lives by providing minimum entitlements to annual holida ys, public holidays, sick leave, bereavement leave and family violence leave  provide clarity and certainty for employers and employees so that employe es receive their correct entitlements  are simpler than the current Act in relation to provisions of, and payment for, entitlements to holidays and leave  are readily implementable in a payroll system  minimise compliance costs for employers  minimise perverse incentives on employers and employees  ensure the balance of decision -making between employers and employees when it comes to requests for holidays and leave is appropriately calibrated  are readily applicable to the full range of working and remuneration arrangements in the labour market both now and in the future  aim to protect overall entitlements for employees. 21. The Taskforce’s Terms of Reference can be found in Annex One and the Cabinet paper establishing the Taskforce can be found at: http://www.mbie.govt.nz/info - services/employment -skills/legislation -reviews/holidays -act-review .
13 Section 1: Introduction 16. In May 2018, the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety established a tripartite Taskforce comprising government (the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) , State Services Commission and Inland Revenue) , the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions , and Bu siness New Zealand , to review the Holidays Act 2003 (the Act) . Professor Gordon Anderson, an employment law specialist from Victoria University, chaired the Taskforce and MBIE provided Secretariat support . 17. The purpose of the review was to make recommendat ions to Government for a clear and transparent set of rules for providing entitlements to, and payment for, holidays and leave . 18. This report begins with relevant background information and a summary of the process the Taskforce followed (Section 1) . This i s followed by a brief overview of the issues with the current Act (Section 2), a summary of the feedback received from stakeholders on the Issues Paper published by the Taskforce in August 2018 (Section 3) , and an overview of the options that the Taskforce developed and tested in the review (Section 4) . Section 5 sets out how the Taskforce assessed these options and made its decisions , while Section 6 sets out the Taskforce’s final recommendations. Summary of the review 19. It has become apparent in recent y ears that there is a high level of non -compliance with the Act. While it generally works for a standard, five day, 40 hour week, the Act can be difficult to apply to more diverse working arrangements and complex remuneration packages. Non-compliance has re sulted in many employees not receiving the correct remuneration for their entitlements and employers spending significant resources on both remediating historical underpayments and complying with the Act. 20. The Taskforce that was established for the review was required to develop, test and make recommendations to the Government on policy options for the provision of, and payment for, holiday and leave entitlements that:  continue to promote the existing purpose of the Holidays Act 2003 , which is to promote bal ance between work and other aspects of employees’ lives by providing minimum entitlements to annual holida ys, public holidays, sick leave, bereavement leave and family violence leave  provide clarity and certainty for employers and employees so that employe es receive their correct entitlements  are simpler than the current Act in relation to provisions of, and payment for, entitlements to holidays and leave  are readily implementable in a payroll system  minimise compliance costs for employers  minimise perverse incentives on employers and employees  ensure the balance of decision -making between employers and employees when it comes to requests for holidays and leave is appropriately calibrated  are readily applicable to the full range of working and remuneration arrangements in the labour market both now and in the future  aim to protect overall entitlements for employees. 21. The Taskforce’s Terms of Reference can be found in Annex One and the Cabinet paper establishing the Taskforce can be found at: http://www.mbie.govt.nz/info - services/employment -skills/legislation -reviews/holidays -act-review . 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
13 f. Material shifts to circular economy and a higher value bioeconomy would need to be supported by sustained Government support Shifting toward s a more circular economy could support market competitiveness , supply chain resilience for critical materials, reduce emissions and environmental degradation, and generate local jobs . The scale of change will require action from across the business sector, consumers and communities , as well as a substantive role for government . Experience from other countries shows the shift can be slow and requires multiple levers . Governments are turning to stronger market -shaping interventions to accelerate the shift to reduced and more efficient use of resources. Moving to higher -value , lowe r-emission products in the bioeconomy will be needed for New Zealand’s transition to a low emissions economy and to achieve the government’s goal to doubl e the value of exports. Moving from volume to value has been a long -term and challenging goal for New Zealand. Collectively , the research programme finds that New Zealand’s shift to a circular economy and to a high -value bioeconomy could be a means to achiev e a range of government goals: emissions reduction, as well as economic productivity and growth, gr owing export value, and supply chain resilience. A material shift will require sustained investment and multiple initiatives across different policy areas supporting coordination, information availability, and innovative activity. Sources: Emerging and future platforms in New Zealand’s bioeconomy Barriers, enablers and approaches for a more circular economy
13. Working tog ether on spectrum policy 1) There will be a programme of regular engagement and information -sharing (subject to any legal constraints) on radio spectrum management work programmes – including the allocation of spectrum to the MSE . 2) Engagement will consist of annual meetings between the MSE or MSWG and the Minister responsible for radio spectrum, and quarterly meetings between ofﬁcials acting on behalf of the Parties. Further details are set out in Appendix D: operational processes for working together on spec trum policy . 3) Nothing in this M OU restricts the MSE’s ability to make direct representations to the decision maker about spectrum policy .
13XXXX; 2104XX; 2108XX; 2112XX; 219999
14 8shrvakdix 2020 -06-03 14:04:00 Publicity 11. Note the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety intends to publicly release the Holidays Act Taskforce Report (Annex 2) alongside a statement signalling the Government’s decision to adopt the recommendations in full
14 Do you agree with the des cription of the other issues in Annex Two? If not, why not?
14 Do you agree with the description of the other issues in Annex Two? If not, why not?
14 Scope of the review 22. The scope of the review was sufficiently broa d so as to generate fundamentally new ways of providing for entitlements and pay, while retaining the purpose of the current Act and (at least) the current levels of entitlement. 23. The Taskforce also ha d scope to consider any other matters relat ing to the A ct that it saw fit. This include d holidays and leave entitlements modified by other Acts (such as the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act 1987 ) and the interplay between the Act and other amendments to legislation (such as the recent amendments to the Employment Relations Act 2000). The Taskforce w as expected to consult to get a comprehensive understanding of the issues with the current legislation, and to draw on examples from overseas jurisdictions where appropriate . 24. The review did not include th e issue of remediation of historical underpay ments of holiday and leave pay. Employers still have an obligation to remediate employees for current and historic underpayments , and must be compliant with the current Act until any new legislation comes into e ffect. 25. The Taskforce notes that a transitional period would be required to ensure a smooth transition for employers, employees and payroll providers to the provisions of any amended Act. The Taskforce did not, however, consider the requirements of such a transitional period as part of the review. The review process 26. The review comprised three phases:  Phase one – Understanding the full range of issues with the current Act  Phase two – Developing and testing options  Phase three – Confirming preferred option( s) and finalising recommendations Phase One – Understanding issues with the current Act 27. It was important for the Taskforce to ensure that it had a full understanding of the issues associated with the current Act. To this end , the Taskforce developed an Iss ues Paper which was released in August 2018 for a period of public consultation. The Issues Paper set out the Taskforce’s understanding of the key issues employers, employees and payroll providers face in trying to implement the Act. Feedback was sought fr om interested stakeholders about:  whether the issues outlined in the Issues Paper were described accurately  whether stakeholders had experienced any other issues working with the Act that were not captured in the Issues Paper (and if so, what those other i ssues were)  whether stakeholders had any suggestions or proposals for change. 28. A total of 87 submissions were received in response to the Issues Paper. They are summarised in Section 3 of this report. CTU affiliate unions did not make submissions in respons e to the Issues Paper. Instead, the affiliate unions provid ed their feedback directly to the Taskforce via the CTU representatives . Business NZ felt that the Issues Paper captured their concerns with the current Act. Phase Two – Developing and testing opti ons 29. The second phase of the review involved developing a number of options for change. The options were informed by feedback received during Phase One , as well as by views and proposals put forward by members of the Taskforce.
14 Scope of the review 22. The scope of the review was sufficiently broa d so as to generate fundamentally new ways of providing for entitlements and pay, while retaining the purpose of the current Act and (at least) the current levels of entitlement. 23. The Taskforce also ha d scope to consider any other matters relat ing to the A ct that it saw fit. This include d holidays and leave entitlements modified by other Acts (such as the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act 1987 ) and the interplay between the Act and other amendments to legislation (such as the recent amendments to the Employment Relations Act 2000). The Taskforce w as expected to consult to get a comprehensive understanding of the issues with the current legislation, and to draw on examples from overseas jurisdictions where appropriate . 24. The review did not include th e issue of remediation of historical underpay ments of holiday and leave pay. Employers still have an obligation to remediate employees for current and historic underpayments , and must be compliant with the current Act until any new legislation comes into e ffect. 25. The Taskforce notes that a transitional period would be required to ensure a smooth transition for employers, employees and payroll providers to the provisions of any amended Act. The Taskforce did not, however, consider the requirements of such a transitional period as part of the review. The review process 26. The review comprised three phases:  Phase one – Understanding the full range of issues with the current Act  Phase two – Developing and testing options  Phase three – Confirming preferred option( s) and finalising recommendations Phase One – Understanding issues with the current Act 27. It was important for the Taskforce to ensure that it had a full understanding of the issues associated with the current Act. To this end , the Taskforce developed an Iss ues Paper which was released in August 2018 for a period of public consultation. The Issues Paper set out the Taskforce’s understanding of the key issues employers, employees and payroll providers face in trying to implement the Act. Feedback was sought fr om interested stakeholders about:  whether the issues outlined in the Issues Paper were described accurately  whether stakeholders had experienced any other issues working with the Act that were not captured in the Issues Paper (and if so, what those other i ssues were)  whether stakeholders had any suggestions or proposals for change. 28. A total of 87 submissions were received in response to the Issues Paper. They are summarised in Section 3 of this report. CTU affiliate unions did not make submissions in respons e to the Issues Paper. Instead, the affiliate unions provid ed their feedback directly to the Taskforce via the CTU representatives . Business NZ felt that the Issues Paper captured their concerns with the current Act. Phase Two – Developing and testing opti ons 29. The second phase of the review involved developing a number of options for change. The options were informed by feedback received during Phase One , as well as by views and proposals put forward by members of the Taskforce. 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
14 Section 10 of the NZBN Act prescribes entities eligible for an NZBN as corporate, public, or unincorporated entities, who do not already have an NZBN, are not ineligible for an NZBN ( eg individuals not registered on the NZBN register as a sole trader or in their personal capacity as a consumer or employee). Annual levy on entities Levy on all fees No levy Justified Efficient Equitable Questions for submitters on proposals for the CO levy: 3 What is your view on who should be charged the CO levy and the typed of shared costs the levy will recover? 4 What impact will paying an annual levy of $15.00 have on your business or organisation?
14 Section 3: Delivering an option What are the next steps? To pro gress
14 Table 2: Impact of new levies and additional $ 6 million budget on registers $000 Current budget Current budget with proposed levies Proposed additional budget Proposed total budget Expenditure by register Companies 12,053 12,053 3,449 15,502 PPSR 6,842 6,842 151 6,993 NZBN 8,008 8,008 700 8,708 Disclose - managed funds 1,286 1,286 525 1,811 Disclose - financial statement filing 809 809 275 1,084 Financial service provider register 2,920 2,920 300 3,220 Limited partnerships 497 497 38 535 Retirement villages 533 533 49 582 Incorporated societies 2,102 2,102 500 2,602 Friendly societies, building societies, and credit unions 134 134 - 134 Insolvency practitioners (IP) 13 13 - 13 IP oversight scheme 663 663 6 669 Auditors 183 183 7 190 Total expenditure budget 36,043 36,043 6,000 42,043 Recovered through CO levy - 9,417 1,449 10,866 NZBN levy - 8,008 700 8,708 IP levy 663 663 6 669 Fees 35,380 17,955 3,645 21,800 Total revenue 36,043 36,043 6,000 42,043 Forecast position of the memorandum account Figure 2 on the next page shows the trend of the annual surpluses or deficits resulting from forecasts of existing and proposed fees and levies over financial years. Surpluses and deficits should trend towards zero overtime. There are two trends: • if there is no change in fees, the deficit is forecast to continue (downward trend); and • if fees and levies are changed as proposed in this document , the memorandum account is forecast to return to a zero balance within five years (upward trend).
14. The Taskforce considered the options for change it developed against a range of criteria set out in its Terms of Reference. These criteria set out that the Taskforce’s recommendations were expected to:
147. No permit is required for a high -altitude payload and the term has very limited application throughout the Act (it is used in section 60 in connection with enforcement powers and in section 88 which extends the regulation making powers to high -altitude payloads, but otherwise does not have any operative effect). ISSUE 148. A key issue is whether a permit should be required for high -altitude payloads. A related question is whether the current definition of ‘high -altitude payload’ is appropriate. 149. The SPRS team noted that recent developments with high -altitude technologies make it desirable that equipment taken into high altitude, such as sensors used for remote sensing or other equipment used in scientific research , is permitted separately from the high -altitude vehicle itself. 150. Submissions have also highlighted that the current definition of ‘high -altitude payload ’ may need refinement.
15 30. A key part of this phase was the need to ensure that options for change were robustly tested , to ensure that they would work in practice. To achieve this, the Taskforce contracted Hudson Taylor, a professional services firm with expertise in payroll matters, to assess and test the op tions that the Taskforce had developed , with anonymised real payroll data. 31. Hudson Taylor undertook three stages of testing as follows:  Stage One testing – a conceptual peer review to test whether the options developed by the Taskforce were capable of being implemented in payroll systems.  Stage Two testing – detailed testing of each option with anonymised payroll data covering a wide range of working arrangements, employers and employee types, and different sectors of the New Zealand economy.  Stage Three tes ting – further testing of the preferred options to assist with the final decision -making. 32. The testing process and the results of the testing are discussed in more detail in Section 4. Phase Thre e – Confirming preferred option (s) and finalising recommendati ons 33. Phase Three of the review involved assessing the options developed by the Taskforce against a range of criteria. The results of the testing carried out at Phase Two of the review formed part of this assessment , but a number of other criteria we re als o used as set out in the Taskforce’s Terms of R eference. The results of this analysis then formed the basis of the final recommendations of the Taskforce , which are set out in Section 6 of this report. 34. Phase Three also included targeted consultation with payroll providers to seek feedback on specific aspects of the proposed recommendations. Overview of the Holidays Act 2003 35. The Act sets out the minimum entitlements to holidays and leave, and payment for them, that employers are obliged to provide to their employees. Its purpose is to promote balance between work and other aspects of employees’ lives by providing minimum entitlements to annual holidays, public holidays, sick leave , bereavement leave and family violence leave . The Ministry of Business, Innova tion and Employment (MBIE) is responsible for administering and enforcing the Act. 36. Two key aims of the Act can be summarised in the following principles :  Entitlements are to be determined in relation to the work pattern at the time the leave is taken . This principle is intended to ensure that the entitlements (both in terms of the leave period to be taken, and the level of payment for the leave period) reflect the employee ’s work pattern at the precise time they take their leave rather than being based on w hat they have hypothetically accrued or ‘earnt’ over time.  Employees should not be financially disadvantaged by taking leave. That is, they should be paid (at least) what they would have earned had they worked for the period they are taking leave for . 37. The key provisions of the Act include:  at least four weeks of annual holidays each year for employees  a paid day off when a public holiday falls on a day that an employee would usually work
15 30. A key part of this phase was the need to ensure that options for change were robustly tested , to ensure that they would work in practice. To achieve this, the Taskforce contracted Hudson Taylor, a professional services firm with expertise in payroll matters, to assess and test the op tions that the Taskforce had developed , with anonymised real payroll data. 31. Hudson Taylor undertook three stages of testing as follows:  Stage One testing – a conceptual peer review to test whether the options developed by the Taskforce were capable of being implemented in payroll systems.  Stage Two testing – detailed testing of each option with anonymised payroll data covering a wide range of working arrangements, employers and employee types, and different sectors of the New Zealand economy.  Stage Three tes ting – further testing of the preferred options to assist with the final decision -making. 32. The testing process and the results of the testing are discussed in more detail in Section 4. Phase Thre e – Confirming preferred option (s) and finalising recommendati ons 33. Phase Three of the review involved assessing the options developed by the Taskforce against a range of criteria. The results of the testing carried out at Phase Two of the review formed part of this assessment , but a number of other criteria we re als o used as set out in the Taskforce’s Terms of R eference. The results of this analysis then formed the basis of the final recommendations of the Taskforce , which are set out in Section 6 of this report. 34. Phase Three also included targeted consultation with payroll providers to seek feedback on specific aspects of the proposed recommendations. Overview of the Holidays Act 2003 35. The Act sets out the minimum entitlements to holidays and leave, and payment for them, that employers are obliged to provide to their employees. Its purpose is to promote balance between work and other aspects of employees’ lives by providing minimum entitlements to annual holidays, public holidays, sick leave , bereavement leave and family violence leave . The Ministry of Business, Innova tion and Employment (MBIE) is responsible for administering and enforcing the Act. 36. Two key aims of the Act can be summarised in the following principles :  Entitlements are to be determined in relation to the work pattern at the time the leave is taken . This principle is intended to ensure that the entitlements (both in terms of the leave period to be taken, and the level of payment for the leave period) reflect the employee ’s work pattern at the precise time they take their leave rather than being based on w hat they have hypothetically accrued or ‘earnt’ over time.  Employees should not be financially disadvantaged by taking leave. That is, they should be paid (at least) what they would have earned had they worked for the period they are taking leave for . 37. The key provisions of the Act include:  at least four weeks of annual holidays each year for employees  a paid day off when a public holiday falls on a day that an employee would usually work 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
15 Annex O ne: Summary of Government response to Holidays Act Taskforce recommendations The table below sets out the Holidays Act Taskforce’s proposals across a number of key themes and compares them with the provisions in the cu rrent Act. Theme/provision Current Act Taskforce prop osals Rec # Government response Calculation of leave payments Annual holidays payments Paid at the greater of:  Ordinary Weekly Pay (OWP) (or average weekly earnings over last 4 weeks if OWP cannot be calculated)  Average weekly earnings over last 12 months For employees that have been on parental leave, only the average weekly earnings over last 12 months is used. Paid at the greater of:  Ordinary Leave Pay  Average weekly earnings over last 4 or 13 weeks (if Ordinary Leave Pay is unclear)  Average weekly earnings over last 52 weeks The above calculation is also used for those who have been on parental leave (i.e. the ‘parental leave override’ is removed). 1, 5 Accept recommendations , adopting 13 weeks as the reference period for the ‘short -run’ average weekly earning s calculation . The Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety also recommends that commission or incentive payments, where it is unclear what period of time the payments were ‘earned’ over, should only be included in the 52 week average payment calculation. FBAPS leave payments Relevant Daily Pay (RDP) or Average Daily Pay over last 52 weeks (if not possible to calculate RDP or if pay varies within pay period) Paid at the greater of:  Ordinary Leave Pay  Average Daily Pay over last 13 weeks 1 Accept recommendation ‘Gross earnings’ definition Lack of clarity as to what payments are included in ‘gross earnings’ (e.g. what a discretionary payment is). Clarifies that ‘gross earnings’ means all cash payments received, except direct reimbursements for costs incurred. 8 Accept recommendation How deduction of entitlement is calculated Period of annual holidays Annual holidays entitlement of four weeks , but lack of detail about how to determine entitlements and payments where it is not obvious (e.g. for employee with variable hours and/or pay). Employee and employer agreement about what genuinely constitutes a working week for the employee. Annual holida ys entitlements are calculated, taken, paid and held in weeks or portions of weeks. Use hours from employment agreement or roster. If no hours set out in employment agreement or roster, then use average hours worked over corresponding days in previous 13 w eeks. 2, 4 Accept recommendations 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:06:53 Day of FBAPS leave Deductions in days (but lack of certainty about how to determine if a day is an Otherwise Working Day). Deductions in days or part -days (sick and family violence leave can be taken in units of less than a day, at a minimum of a ¼ of a day). Prescribed formula for determining an Otherwise Working Day. 9, 11, 13 Accept recommendations Taking annual holidays in advance Employees become entitled to four weeks’ leave after 12 months continuous employment. The Act does not specifically provide for leave in advance (i.e. it is at the discretion of the employer). Employees become entitled to four weeks’ leave after 12 months continuous employment, but have the ability to take leave in advance on a pro-rata basis (e.g. could take 2 weeks leave after working for 6 months). 3 Accept recommendation Pay-as-you-go (PAYG) There is confusion as to what ‘intermittent or irregular’ means in relation to employees being eligible to re ceive annual holiday pay with their pay (instead of being entitled to take paid time off) . Clearer definition of what ‘intermittent or irregular’ means, and employers required to review PAYG employees every 13 weeks to check eligibility for PAYG. Also removes the ability to pay PA YG for employees on fixed - term contracts of less than 12 months. 6 Accept recommendation Availability provisions Silent on how availability provisions interact with leave. Clarifies how availability provisions and leave interact. 7 Accept recommendation FBAPS eligibility Employees are eligible for sick, bereavement and family violence leave after six months continuous employment or if they meet an hours test after six months. A new eligibility test for sick, bereavement and family violence leave. Bereavem ent leave and family violence leave are available from day one, and sick leave accrues over four months. Bereavement leave is expanded to cover more family members. 10, 12, 14 Accept recommendations Transferring public holidays Employees can transfer a public holiday to another day, but can be left worse off in some circumstances. Provisions are amended to reduce the chance of employees being disadvantaged by a transfer. 15 Accept recommendation Closedowns Closedown provisions are confusing and can disadvantage employees. Closedown provisions are amended to provide greater transparency and certainty, and reduce negative outcomes for employees. 17 Accept recommendation Sale and transfer of a business Employees must have all of their leave entitlement s paid out and reset on the sale Employees have a choice about whether to transfer all of their leave entitlements or have them paid out. 18 Accept recommendation 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:06:53 and transfer of a business. Many employers are unclear on these provisions. Record keeping and payslips Employers must keep relevant records. No requirement to provide a payslip to employees. Record keeping requirements are updated in line with the general statutory obligation to keep records relat ing to minimum employment standards , and employe rs must provide detailed payslips every pay period. 19, 20 Accept recommendations Compliance and enforcement A range of information and education tools are available to support employers to comply with the current legislation ( including detailed guidance first published in 2017) . Labour Inspectors also have a range of compliance tools t o address non -compliance, ranging from enforceable undertakings and infringement notices , to seeking penalties through the employment institutions for more serious breaches. The Taskforce recommended further work be undertaken to develop appropriate compliance and enforcement mechanisms to support implementation of a revised Holidays Act. 21 Accept recommendation , noting an initial view that any changes required to these mech anisms are likely to be minor and consistent with the general framework of current employment legislation Going above the minimum standards Although employers and employees can agree to different arrangements as long as they meet the minimum, this could be made clearer. The Act explicitly states that different arrangements can be agreed as long as entitlements can be demonstrated to at least meet the minimum standards. 22 Accept recommendation
15 Are you aware of any further issues you believe should be considered ? If so, what are they?
15 Figure 2: Memorandum account balance FY 2011 – 2029
15 For applicants who do not have variable components of pay and work consistent hours each week, the outcome of the proposed fo ur-week average formula will be very close to the legal status quo for OWP. In oth er cases, because the proposed formula is based on gross taxable earnings which includes more payment types than OWP ( e.g. one-off bonuses and commission payments that are not a regular part of pay), it might produce a slightly higher payment rate compared to the legal status quo. In a small number of cases, it might produce a lower payment rate than OWP if the applicant’s four -week average of gross taxable weekly earnings was lower than both their OWP in the week before P PL payments commence and their AWI. 6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:12:15 I N C O N F I D E N C E 22 I N C O N F I D E N C E be manageable within the existing appr opriation. IR implementation costs are also expected to be min or because the proposed formula is aligned with the one already being applied .16 Treatment of leave entitlements in a restructuring situation In 2020, Cabinet agreed that “on the sale and tran sfer of a business, employees should have a choice about whether to transfer all of their leave entitlements or have them paid out and reset .”17 The Taskforce’s recommendation aimed to address the lack of legislative clarity regarding the treatment of leave entitlements for some employees in these situations which results in (well intentioned) common practice in breach of the Act.
15 Stout Street, PO Box 1473,
15 Stout Street, Wellington 6011
15 Stout Street, Wellington, New Zealand 6011
15 The New Zealand Business Number Funding (Validation and Authorisation) Act 2019 . 16 This includes companies, overseas companies, incorporated societies, limited partnerships , friendly societies, credit unions and building societies . 24 Questions for submitters on proposals for the NZBN levy: 5 What is your view on who should be charged the NZBN levy and the costs the levy will recover? 6 What impact will paying an annual levy of $12.00 have on your business or organisation?
15. Non -exclusive relationship 1) MSWG acknowledges the agreements under this MOU do not create an exclusive relationship and the Minister (s) and the Crown may develop other relationships with third parties (including external stakeholders, other Māori entities, or international instruments) provided however that where the Crown intends to enter into or enters into relationships with other parties which relate to the relationship between M SWG and the Crown as detailed in this MOU, then the Crown will ensure: a) That it discloses to MSWG in a prior and transparent manner the Crown’s intentions and provides MSWG with sufficient information to make an informed response to the Crown as to the impl ications (if any) of the Crown’s proposed relationship with the third party; and b) That any relationship with a third party will not, to the extent possible, undermine this MOU.
15. The Taskforce was particularly guided by three key principles: certainty, transparency and practicality. It wanted the recommendations to provide the certainty that employers and employees require, to ensure that employees are fully informed about their le ave entitlements, and to work in the real world. It also wanted to ensure that no employee would be worse off under its proposals.
16 Are the broad principles that underpin the Holidays Act (that entitlements are to be determined in relation to the work pattern at the time the leave is taken and that employees should not be financially disadvantaged by taking leave) still appropriate?
16 Section 3: The basis for setting fees and levies Proposed fees and levies are set to recover approximately $42 million annually, considering the proposed increase in budget and any forecast deficit. A cost allocation model identifies the costs to be recovered The Companies Office uses a cost allocation model , developed in 2017 , to identify the type and amount of costs that need to be recovered from users. The model was derived from an analysis of the type of expenditure , the type of services the Companies Office provides, the time spent by staff on specific services within a specific register (like incorporating a company or filing an annual return) , and the volumes they deliver.7 The cost allocation model assumes that: • users benefit from the registry services of the Companies Office and should contribute to their funding through fees; • any forecast deficit or surplus is accounted for in final fees and levies; and • fees and levies are set to ensure that , overall, the memorandum account balance trends towards a nil balance within the next five years. The cost allocation process has three components, outlined in Figure 3 below. Figure 3: Components of cost allocation
16 This is a high -level assessment based on officials’ preferred option. 17The Holidays Act require s that the outgoing employer must pay out untaken annual leave and alternative holiday entitlements when the employment with them ends . 18 Restructuring situations include when a business is sold or transferred or work is contracted in or out . 6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:12:15 I N C O N F I D E N C E 23 I N C O N F I D E N C E Operationalising the change agreed by Cabinet would mean that employers would be required to offer employees a choice about whether to have their leave entitlements transferred or paid out by the outgoing employer, as a downstream decision of something they are voluntarily agreeing to. Imposing this statutory constraint on employers’ contractual arrangements and could discourage the in coming employer from offering employees the opportunity to transfer their employment if large leave liabilities were involved . o how liability will be apportioned betwee n the employers must also be negotiated and agreed by the outgoing and incoming employers ; o how and what employee information required by the incoming employer in relation to leave entitlements will be provided so that they can correctly determine the employee ’s entitlements and payments ; o when an employee takes transferred leave entitlements , the payment rate must not be less than what it would have been had it been paid out at the time of transfer .
16  at least five days each year of paid sick leave  three days paid leave if an employee’s immediate family member dies, or one day’s paid leave for the death of a person outside their immediate family  from 1 April 2019, the Act now provide s up to ten days of leave for people affected by family violence (on a similar basis to the provisions for sick leave and bereavement leave ). 38. The Act provides a number of calculations for determining pay when employees take holidays or leave. For annual holidays , employees must be paid whichever is the greater of their Ordinary W eekly Pay or th eir average weekl y earnings over the previous 12 months. For all other types of leave , employees must be paid their R elevant Daily Pay, or if impractical or the employee ’s daily pay within the relevant pay period is variable , their Average Daily P ay. 39. The Act also covers a number of issues such as annual closedowns for businesses, transferring public holidays , the ability to ‘cash up’ one week’s annual holiday entitlement and the employer’s obligation to keep records . The enforcement provisions follow those in the Employment Relations Act 2000 and, as with other minimum entitlements, permit both employees and Labour I nspectors to take cases.
16. For the exposure draft w e propose the inclusion of the following formula to clarify the amount of AL that would accrue during a part week of unpaid leave (the treatment of part weeks was identified as lacking clarity and causing confusion in the current rules by our stakeholder working group) : Number of hours that the employee did work in the week unpaid leave was taken (up to the value of the denominator), divided by the employee’s average number o f guaranteed hours per seven - day period, multiplied by 0.0768 . 17. Under the Act, if it is agreed that unpaid leave beyond the first week will be included in continuous employment, when the employee takes AL and the employer makes the payment calculation, the y must also reduce the 52 - week divisor for the Average Weekly Earnings (AWE) calculation5 by the number of whole or part weeks of unpaid leave greater than one that fall in the 52 week reference period . This means that, weeks of unpaid leave beyond the fi rst week also do not deflate the payment rate. This rule does not apply when
16. Representations 1) The parties agree they will not make any statement on the other’s behalf to any third party without the express authorisation of the other party.
16. Significant thought has gone into ensuring that the OSHAA Act is flexible enough to deal with rapidly evolving technology and market demand. Equal importance has been placed on keeping compliance costs as low as possible. The lesson from overseas experience is that this is necessary to avoid stifling economic and innovation opportunities and to underpin New Zealand’s advantage as a location for space activities. 17. The OSHAA Act achieves these objectives by establishing a decision -making framework that is risk -based and proportionate. It avoids unnecessary prescription , for example, by allowing the decision -maker to tailor the conditions of licences and permits to provide a graduated approach to risk-management (rather than a “one -size fits all” approach). 18. The OSHAA Act ’s regulation -making powers also provide the necessary scope to deal with future technologies and applications. A number of regulation making powers are included in the OSHAA Act . Not all of them must be used initially or will be relevant for every activity – they are built into the legislation to future proof it and to enable a flexible approach to managing risk . The regulator can take existing foreign licenses i nto account when considering an application 19. The OSHAA Act enables the Minister to take into account foreign licenc es for the activity when de ciding whether to grant a licence for launches, payloads or launch facilities. This approach has been taken to red uce duplication of costs for applicants and is consistent with a number of other New Zealand regulatory regimes like product safety. 20. International cooperation arrangements with certain foreign regulators will facilitate this aspect of the regime. The ab ility for foreign licenc es to be taken into account has influenced the nature of the regulations proposed in this document , particularly the information requirements . 21. We note that there are some issues which New Zealand must consider from its own perspecti ve (like fitness to hold a license, national interest, and national security). We have asses sed the marginal impacts of the proposed requirements in New Zealand on top of what applicants will face overseas (e.g. to what extent do the proposals add cost for these applicants by requiring differing or more comprehensive information to be provided with applications ). On balance , we consider that the impacts are justified in relation to the benefits of ensuring a safe and secure environment for space activities . 22. The ability to recognise authorisations granted in a foreign jurisdiction reduces the compliance burden on applicants and enables the New Zealand S pace Agency to operate effectively from day one of the regime coming into force. As noted above, space activities are a new industry for New Zealand and it will take time to develop the necessary technical capability and expertise required to operate a comprehensive licensing regime. Key information gaps and assumptions 23. Disruptive technologies are making it e asier and more affordable to access space and this is creating opportunities for new participants and new products and services. New Zealand is seeking to facilitate a dynamic and competitive space industry by putting in place a regulatory regime that prov ides flexibility to accommodate future industry developments and the evolution of international space law, whilst managing risk . 24. Key assumptions in re lation to the design of the regime are: • Overly onerous licensing requirements would impose high compliance costs and would deter foreign payload providers from launching in New Zealand s tifling the development of a New Zealand -based space industry . This means any regulatory 8
16. The Taskforce was not able to consult widely on its proposed recommendations due to timeframe pressure. Although it consulte d on a subset of its recommendations with a small group of payroll providers in September 2019, there are likely to be other interested stakeholders, such as other payroll providers and practitioners, businesses and employment lawyers.
167b Victoria Street West
16XXXX; 2102XX; 2106XX; 2110XX
17 How could holiday entitlements be provided for in a way th at reflects the flexible working arrangements we have in New Zealand, including any arrangements we expect to see in the future?
17 How could holiday entitlements be provided for in a way that reflects the flexible working arrangements we have in New Zealand, including any arrangements we expect to see in the future?
17 Section 2: Issues with the current Act 40. In August 2018 , the Taskforce produced an Issues Paper which summarised t he main issues with the current Act and sought views from stakeholders about whether they had been correctly captured . The key issues with the current Act are outlined below. For a fuller discussion please see the Issues Paper : https://www.mbie.govt.nz/assets/Uploads/bbb42c0baf/holidays -act-review -issues - paper.pdf . Who is affected by the issues with the current Act ? Many employers and employees are affec ted by non -compliance with the Act… 41. It is clear to the Taskforce that issues with the Act are widespread across the New Zealand economy. Many employers and employees are affected by non -compliance with the Act and e ven employers with a workforce working st andard hours may face challenges , such as not including all relevant payments in ‘gross earnings’. Finding solutions to the challenges posed by the Act will therefore support all employers and employees to better understand their obligations and entitlemen ts. 42. Employees and employers are not assisted in endeavouring to comply with the Holidays Act where payslips do not contain the necessary i nformation to assess compliance, or similarly, where leave transaction records are not easily accessible. Arguably ma ny non - compliance issues could have been addressed earlier through a greater level of transparen cy. …but it’s harder for some employers for different reasons… 43. Some employers find it more difficult to comply with the Act, or are more likely to face implemen tation issues than others, particularly where there are flexible or variable work practices in place. Small employers may have difficulty interpreting the Act , while large employers attempting to systematise their payroll can run into issues with the parts of the Act that require manual decision -making and intervention (such as the determination of what a ‘week’ is for an employee). 44. Some employers are unable to comply with the Act because their payroll system is not compliant, or because they misunderstand the capabilities and limitations of their system. Furthermore, the ‘set -and-forget’ mentality that some employers have regarding systemisation often mean s that payroll systems may not be updated when circumstances change. 45. Some sectors and industries are particularly prone to complex working arrangements that do not fit the standard working week that the Act was originally based on. For example, sectors that have a high proportion of employees working irregular hours, such as hospitality, retail , or healt h services , may be more likely to have problems with interpreting and implementing the Act. …and the effects can be worse for some employees 46. A common problem for many employees is the uncertainty about entitlements and payments that is associated with wor king irregular hours, shift work, or changing hours. 47. Issues also arise in relation to payments as well as the actual entitlements, especially when employees’ pay is variable or the payroll system is not updated when changes occur. This can occur when emplo yees’ payments include commission, incentive -based payments, overtime, or board and lodgings. Complications can arise in determining whether these additional payments are ‘regular’ or not, and whether they should or should not be included in the calculatio n of payments for leave.
17 Section 2: Issues with the current Act 40. In August 2018 , the Taskforce produced an Issues Paper which summarised t he main issues with the current Act and sought views from stakeholders about whether they had been correctly captured . The key issues with the current Act are outlined below. For a fuller discussion please see the Issues Paper : https://www.mbie.govt.nz/assets/Uploads/bbb42c0baf/holidays -act-review -issues - paper.pdf . Who is affected by the issues with the current Act ? Many employers and employees are affec ted by non -compliance with the Act… 41. It is clear to the Taskforce that issues with the Act are widespread across the New Zealand economy. Many employers and employees are affected by non -compliance with the Act and e ven employers with a workforce working st andard hours may face challenges , such as not including all relevant payments in ‘gross earnings’. Finding solutions to the challenges posed by the Act will therefore support all employers and employees to better understand their obligations and entitlemen ts. 42. Employees and employers are not assisted in endeavouring to comply with the Holidays Act where payslips do not contain the necessary i nformation to assess compliance, or similarly, where leave transaction records are not easily accessible. Arguably ma ny non - compliance issues could have been addressed earlier through a greater level of transparen cy. …but it’s harder for some employers for different reasons… 43. Some employers find it more difficult to comply with the Act, or are more likely to face implemen tation issues than others, particularly where there are flexible or variable work practices in place. Small employers may have difficulty interpreting the Act , while large employers attempting to systematise their payroll can run into issues with the parts of the Act that require manual decision -making and intervention (such as the determination of what a ‘week’ is for an employee). 44. Some employers are unable to comply with the Act because their payroll system is not compliant, or because they misunderstand the capabilities and limitations of their system. Furthermore, the ‘set -and-forget’ mentality that some employers have regarding systemisation often mean s that payroll systems may not be updated when circumstances change. 45. Some sectors and industries are particularly prone to complex working arrangements that do not fit the standard working week that the Act was originally based on. For example, sectors that have a high proportion of employees working irregular hours, such as hospitality, retail , or healt h services , may be more likely to have problems with interpreting and implementing the Act. …and the effects can be worse for some employees 46. A common problem for many employees is the uncertainty about entitlements and payments that is associated with wor king irregular hours, shift work, or changing hours. 47. Issues also arise in relation to payments as well as the actual entitlements, especially when employees’ pay is variable or the payroll system is not updated when changes occur. This can occur when emplo yees’ payments include commission, incentive -based payments, overtime, or board and lodgings. Complications can arise in determining whether these additional payments are ‘regular’ or not, and whether they should or should not be included in the calculatio n of payments for leave. 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
17 The insolvency practitioners regime is co -regulated between MBIE and accredited industry bodies. This means that all insolvency practitioners are required to hold a licence from an accredited front -line regulator currently the New Zealand Institute of Chartered Accountants (NZICA). 18 Companies who register under sections 12 and 336 (1) of the Companies Act and file an annual return under sections 214 (1) and 340(1). 25 Table 8: Proposed IP levy IP oversight scheme Unit Cost ($) Proposed levy ($) Current levy ($) Change in charge ($) % change IP levy 0.96 1.00 1.00 - -
17 government organisations
17% growth in Essential Skills visa holders
17. Conﬁdentiality 1) The parties agree that unless otherwise required by law or by mutual agreement that they will keep conﬁdential all information acquired as a result of t his MOU. 2) The parties acknowledge that any information held by the Crown may be required to be released under the Ofﬁcial Information Act 1982 or the Privacy Act 2020. 3) The parties agree to consult with each other on any proposed release of information where practicable. 4) For the avoidance of doubt, the MSWG is entitled to disclose to its members appropriate information , provided that those to whom this information is disclosed are made aware of the
17XXXX; 190305 to 190306; 190309; 25XXXX
18 How could the different calculations for holidays and leave payments be simplified?
18 There are a number of cross -cutting issues with the current Act 48. There are a number of cross -cutting issues that apply across the whole Act rather than to one specific section. These relate to the design of the Act itself and are th e cause of many of the problems employers, employees and professional service providers (including payroll providers) face in working with the Act. These issues include :  the lack of prescription in the Act which can make it hard to implement, particularly if agreement between employer and employee is not reached (for example, the re is no explicit guidance about how to determine a ‘week’ for the purpose of the annual holidays entitlement if it is not clear (e.g. if an employee work s variable hours and days from week to week) )  the complexity of the Act , which can cause confusion for those using it (for example, the Act includes several different pay calculations , and employers often struggle to use the correct calculations at the correct times (such as when to use Relevant Daily Pay compared to Average Daily Pay))  the lack of clarity in relation to spe cific terms included in the Act (for example, the lack of a clear definition of ‘ regular’ in relation to determining what income should be included in calculati ons for the payment of leave ). Annual holidays – determining entitlements and payments 49. There are a range of specific issues related to those sections of the Act that deal with the entitlements to, and payments for, annual holidays. These include: Determin ing what a week is 50. A fundamental issue in terms of compliance with the Act is to determine what a week is in relation to an employee’s working arrangements. This can be very simple for some , but difficult for other forms of working arrangements , such as th ose on shift patterns that are not based on calendar weeks , or those with variable days and hours of work. 51. If agreement is not reached early on between an employer and an employee about what constitutes a working week for that employee, then this can have significant consequences when the employee takes leave. The basis of this agreement may also change over time, meaning that the agreement may need to be revisited. In practice this does not always occur when working arrangements change. Incorrect accrual over time 52. Problems can arise when payroll systems are used that have not been adapted to the requirements of New Zealand law. For example, many payroll systems use accrual methods based on accumulating an entitlement over time. This approach may not be com patible with the requirements of the Act, in particular the need for entitlements to be determined in relation to the work pattern at the time the leave is taken. Particular problems arise when an employee’s hours increase , as an employee will not accrue sufficient time for four weeks’ leave if their hours increase during the year. Knowing which method to use to determine payments for annual holidays, and how to use it correctly 53. Section 21 of the Act requires employees to be paid for their annual holidays at a rate that is the greater of either their Ordinary Weekly Pay (OWP) at the point the leave is taken, or their average weekly earnings (AWE) for the 12 months previous. Correctly applying section 21 requires employers to calculate both OWP and AWE and to use the larger number . There are many stages in this process , which introduce s the risk of non - compliance, if reliable quality assurance is not used.
18 There are a number of cross -cutting issues with the current Act 48. There are a number of cross -cutting issues that apply across the whole Act rather than to one specific section. These relate to the design of the Act itself and are th e cause of many of the problems employers, employees and professional service providers (including payroll providers) face in working with the Act. These issues include :  the lack of prescription in the Act which can make it hard to implement, particularly if agreement between employer and employee is not reached (for example, the re is no explicit guidance about how to determine a ‘week’ for the purpose of the annual holidays entitlement if it is not clear (e.g. if an employee work s variable hours and days from week to week) )  the complexity of the Act , which can cause confusion for those using it (for example, the Act includes several different pay calculations , and employers often struggle to use the correct calculations at the correct times (such as when to use Relevant Daily Pay compared to Average Daily Pay))  the lack of clarity in relation to spe cific terms included in the Act (for example, the lack of a clear definition of ‘ regular’ in relation to determining what income should be included in calculati ons for the payment of leave ). Annual holidays – determining entitlements and payments 49. There are a range of specific issues related to those sections of the Act that deal with the entitlements to, and payments for, annual holidays. These include: Determin ing what a week is 50. A fundamental issue in terms of compliance with the Act is to determine what a week is in relation to an employee’s working arrangements. This can be very simple for some , but difficult for other forms of working arrangements , such as th ose on shift patterns that are not based on calendar weeks , or those with variable days and hours of work. 51. If agreement is not reached early on between an employer and an employee about what constitutes a working week for that employee, then this can have significant consequences when the employee takes leave. The basis of this agreement may also change over time, meaning that the agreement may need to be revisited. In practice this does not always occur when working arrangements change. Incorrect accrual over time 52. Problems can arise when payroll systems are used that have not been adapted to the requirements of New Zealand law. For example, many payroll systems use accrual methods based on accumulating an entitlement over time. This approach may not be com patible with the requirements of the Act, in particular the need for entitlements to be determined in relation to the work pattern at the time the leave is taken. Particular problems arise when an employee’s hours increase , as an employee will not accrue sufficient time for four weeks’ leave if their hours increase during the year. Knowing which method to use to determine payments for annual holidays, and how to use it correctly 53. Section 21 of the Act requires employees to be paid for their annual holidays at a rate that is the greater of either their Ordinary Weekly Pay (OWP) at the point the leave is taken, or their average weekly earnings (AWE) for the 12 months previous. Correctly applying section 21 requires employers to calculate both OWP and AWE and to use the larger number . There are many stages in this process , which introduce s the risk of non - compliance, if reliable quality assurance is not used. 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
18 months after the date the Bill receives Royal assent ;
18% of Pacific residence approvals were through the Residence from Work visa category, which has been set up as a step towards gaining residence and settling in New Zealand permanently. Although the numbers are small, the number of approvals under this visa category has more than doubled in the last 5 years.
18. I have included a brief summary of the group’s main recommendations below.
18. Review and v ariation of MOU 1) The parties acknowledge that over time th is MOU may need to evolve to reﬂect changing circumstances. Therefore, the parties will meet solely for the purpose of reviewing the progress in achieving the objectives of this MOU every three years, or otherwise more frequently as mutually agreed. 2) The parties may at any time and by mutual , written agreement amend this MOU to reﬂect: a) Changing circumstances; or b) A termination date for this MOU where a legislative and/or contractual relationship between the parties addresses the matters which are the subject of this MOU , including this principle of review .
18.2 Appendix 2 – MBIE Return on Prosecution (Required for all disposed MBIE prosecutions) CRI No: Insert CRI No. (eg: CRI-2015 -004-001234) FILE No : Insert client ref/ActionStep reference if relevant
1801XX; 180401 to 180404; 180406 to 180499; 189999; 190102; 1902XX; 190501; 190503; 199999
180201 to 180203; 180205 to 180299; 180504 to 180599;
180204; 180302; 180405; 180503; 180602
180301; 180303; 180306 to 180307; 180399
180304 to 180305; 180308; 180501 to 180502; 180603
19 There are no proposed fees for the NZBN register – all costs of the register will be recovered from entities through the proposed NZBN levy. 27 Table 9: Proposed fees and charges for Companies register services $ (excluding GST) Companies register Unit Cost Proposed fee Proposed levies Proposed total charge Current charge (fee + levy) Change in charge % change Name approval 10.85 11.00 - 11.00 10.00 1.00 10% Company (New Zealand and overseas) incorporation20* 55.28 55.00 28.00 83.00 91.00 (8.00) (9%) Annual return (New Zealand and overseas)21* 8.62 9.00 28.00 37.00 22.00 15.00 68% Annual return – API (New Zealand and overseas)22* 5.90 6.00 28.00 34.00 19.00 15.00 79% Amalgamation 742.56 745.00 - 745.00 350.00 395.00 113% Restoration 225.61 225.00 - 225.00 150.00 75.00 50% *CO levy $15.00, NZBN levy $12.00, IP levy $ 1.00 Name approval This fee was changed from $8.89 to $10 .00 in 2017. The proposed fee reflects the general increase in the cost of the service since th at time . Company incorporation Since 2017, a portion of the cost of the NZBN register has been included in the company incorporation fee. These costs will now be recovered within the proposed NZBN levy (see Section 4: Who would pay the levy and when ), removing them from the company incorporation unit cost , resulting in a lower fee. Annual return In 2017, the annual return fee was set below cost to significantly reduce the surplus balance in the memorandum account. This fee was reduced at that time because, for the most part, companies had contributed towards this surplus over time due to increasing volumes and a stable cost structure . The NZBN costs previously recovered from the fee have been reapportioned to the NZBN levy, resulting in the proposed fee portion reducing from $21.00 to $ 9.00 (and from $18.00 to $ 6.00 for Annual return - API transactions). The proposed total charge for annual returns now reflects full cost recovery with the fee and inclusion of the NZBN and CO levies resulting in a net increase . Amalgamation An increase in the proposed amalgamation fee reflects full cost recovery for this service. The nature of the work required to support this service is labour -intensive. While there are only about 370 amalgamation applications per year, it is important that these applications are reviewed thoroughly,
19 Using the ‘pay -as-you-go’ provision inappropriately 54. Section 28 allows an employer to regularly pay annua l holiday pay of 8 per cent of the employee’s gross earnings , in lieu of providing four weeks of annual holidays (commonly referred to as ‘pay -as-you-go’(PAYG)) . 55. However, an employer is only able to do so if the employee is on a fixed -term agreement for le ss than 12 months, or works on a basis that is ‘so intermittent or irregular that it is impracticable for the employer to provide the employee with four weeks’ annual holidays.’ 56. It is not always clear to employers when this clause applies, and what ‘ imprac ticable ’ means – especially if an employee requests or agrees to have holiday pay included in their regular pay. There is no statutory definition of a ‘casual’ working arrangement, even though this term is sometimes used in employment agreements. Taking an nual holidays in advance 57. Employees are entitled to four weeks’ paid annual holidays after 12 months of continuous employment. Employees can request annual holidays in advance but employers have no obligation to approve this request. This means an employee may not be able to take any time off work during their first 12 months of employment. There are legitimate personal and community responsibilities that can mean that workers require time away from work before they have completed 12 months of continuous emp loyment. FBAPS leave (family violence leave, bereavement leave, alternative holidays, public holidays and sick leave ) – determining entitlements and payments 58. There are also a range of specific issues related to those sections of the Act that deal with the entitlement to, and payments for, FBAPS leave. These include: Determinin g an ‘Otherwise W orking Day’ (OWD) 59. Although Section 12(3) provides a list of factors t o be taken into account by the employer and employee when determining whether a day is an OWD , the se factors are not ranked and t here is no guidance about the weighting that should be attached to each factor . Determining what payments are included in an employee’s ‘Relevant D aily Pay’ (RDP) and when ‘Average D aily Pay’ (ADP) can be used instead 60. The pa yment for a public holiday, alternative holiday, sick leave , bereavement leave and family violence leave is determined using RDP. This is defined by section 9 of the Act as the amount of pay that the employee would have received had they worked on the day concerned. 61. RDP is a subjective and hypothetical decision, based on the historic earnings of the employee as well as the employer’s estimation of what the employee ‘ would have received had the employee worked on the day concerned’ (for instance, by looking at what ot her employees who did work earned ). This is more difficult to calculate if employees’ earnings vary considerably (especially if commissions or other additional payments are part of their earnings), if the business is not open on the OWD that is being considered (e.g. it is shut for a public holiday) or where sufficient records are not kept. 62. There is also an issue relating to the calculation of ADP, as the formula in section 9A (2) requires the employee’s gross earnings to be divided by the number of whole or part days they worked. This could potentially disadvantage employees who work varied
19 Using the ‘pay -as-you-go’ provision inappropriately 54. Section 28 allows an employer to regularly pay annua l holiday pay of 8 per cent of the employee’s gross earnings , in lieu of providing four weeks of annual holidays (commonly referred to as ‘pay -as-you-go’(PAYG)) . 55. However, an employer is only able to do so if the employee is on a fixed -term agreement for le ss than 12 months, or works on a basis that is ‘so intermittent or irregular that it is impracticable for the employer to provide the employee with four weeks’ annual holidays.’ 56. It is not always clear to employers when this clause applies, and what ‘ imprac ticable ’ means – especially if an employee requests or agrees to have holiday pay included in their regular pay. There is no statutory definition of a ‘casual’ working arrangement, even though this term is sometimes used in employment agreements. Taking an nual holidays in advance 57. Employees are entitled to four weeks’ paid annual holidays after 12 months of continuous employment. Employees can request annual holidays in advance but employers have no obligation to approve this request. This means an employee may not be able to take any time off work during their first 12 months of employment. There are legitimate personal and community responsibilities that can mean that workers require time away from work before they have completed 12 months of continuous emp loyment. FBAPS leave (family violence leave, bereavement leave, alternative holidays, public holidays and sick leave ) – determining entitlements and payments 58. There are also a range of specific issues related to those sections of the Act that deal with the entitlement to, and payments for, FBAPS leave. These include: Determinin g an ‘Otherwise W orking Day’ (OWD) 59. Although Section 12(3) provides a list of factors t o be taken into account by the employer and employee when determining whether a day is an OWD , the se factors are not ranked and t here is no guidance about the weighting that should be attached to each factor . Determining what payments are included in an employee’s ‘Relevant D aily Pay’ (RDP) and when ‘Average D aily Pay’ (ADP) can be used instead 60. The pa yment for a public holiday, alternative holiday, sick leave , bereavement leave and family violence leave is determined using RDP. This is defined by section 9 of the Act as the amount of pay that the employee would have received had they worked on the day concerned. 61. RDP is a subjective and hypothetical decision, based on the historic earnings of the employee as well as the employer’s estimation of what the employee ‘ would have received had the employee worked on the day concerned’ (for instance, by looking at what ot her employees who did work earned ). This is more difficult to calculate if employees’ earnings vary considerably (especially if commissions or other additional payments are part of their earnings), if the business is not open on the OWD that is being considered (e.g. it is shut for a public holiday) or where sufficient records are not kept. 62. There is also an issue relating to the calculation of ADP, as the formula in section 9A (2) requires the employee’s gross earnings to be divided by the number of whole or part days they worked. This could potentially disadvantage employees who work varied 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
19 What changes would make the Act easier to apply to workers with variable hours/days of work?
19. Dispute resolution 1) The parties will act at all times in good faith. However, in the event of a d ispute the parties agree to the following process: a) If one party considers there has been a breach of this MOU, then that party may give written notice to the other that they are in dispute. b) Before written notice is given under this clause 19.1.a, the parti es may agree to participate in a dispute resolution method that reflects the values and principles of tikanga Māori. c) As soon as practicable upon receipt of the notice given under clause 19.1. a, the parties ’ representatives will meet to work in good faith to resolve the issue. d) If the dispute has not been resolved within 20 working days of receipt of the notice given under 19.1.a, the Chief Executive of MBIE , or their delegate, and a nominated representative of the MSWG and/or MSE will meet in good faith to resolve the issue. e) if the dispute has not been resolved within 20 working days of the meeting set out in clause 19.1.d, the nominated representative of the MSWG and/or MSE will meet in good faith with the Minister for the Digital Economy and Communications to resolve the issue.
19. The Holidays Act 2003 sets out the minimum entitlements to holidays and leave, and payment for them, that employers are obliged to provide to their employees. Its purpose is to promote balance between work and other aspects of employees’ lives by providing minimum entitlements to annual holidays, public holidays, sick leave and bereavement leave. MBIE is responsible for administering and enforcing the Act. 20. Two key aims of the Act can be summarised in the following principles :  Entitlements are to be determined in relation to the work pattern at the time the leave is taken . This principle is intended to ensure that the entitlements (both in terms of the leave period to be tak en, and the level of payment for the leave period) reflect the employees work pattern at the precise time they take their leave rather than being based on what they have hypothetically accrued or ‘earnt’ over time.  Employees should not be financially disad vantaged by taking leave. That is, they should be paid (at least) what they would have earned had they worked for the period they are taking leave for . 21. The key provisions of the Act include: o at least four weeks of annual holidays each year for employees o a paid day off when a public holiday falls on a day that an employee would usually work o at least five days each year of paid sick leave o three days paid leave if an employee’s immediate family member dies, or one days paid leave for the death of a person outside their immediate family o from 1 April 2019, the Act will also provide for up to ten days of leave for people affected by domestic violence (on a similar basis to the provisions for sick leave and bereavement leave ) 22. The Act provides a number of calcul ations for determining pay when holidays or leave are taken. For annual holidays , employees must be paid whichever is the greater of their ordinary weekly pay or their average weekly earnings over the previous 12 months. For all other types of leave, emplo yees must be paid their relevant daily pay, or if impractical or the employee ’s daily pay within the relevant pay period is variable , their average daily pay. 23. The Act also covers a number of issues such as annual closedowns for businesses, transferring of public holidays , the ability to ‘cash up’ one week’s annual holiday entitlement and the employer’s obligation to keep records . The enforcement provisions follow those in the Employment Relations Act 2000 and, as with other minimum entitlements, permit bot h employees and labour inspectors to take cases. 24. While the Act provides for certain levels of minimum entitlements, it does not pr ovide full guidance on how these are to be provided in different working situations . For a standard five day, 40 hour working week, this is generally straightforward, but in other situations it is not obvious, such as when employees work unpredictable hours or receive variable pay (such as commissions) . In these situations the Act relies on employers and employees reaching agreement as to how entitlements will be met or taken.
190101; 190103 to 190199; 190301; 190399; 190502; 190504 to 190507; 190599
190308; 2401XX to 2403XX; 2406XX to 2410XX; 2416XX; 249999
193 additional provincial schools
2 1.4 Policy Intent The Act puts into place a flexible approach to managing the risks associated with space activities. This approach incorporates the provisions in the Act relating to the management of New Zealand’s liability under the Outer Space Treaties. New Zealand’s regulatory regime takes the view that liability is best managed by those whose activities create the risk. The Act preserves flexibility for risk sharing between the government and the licensee across the activities governed by the Act. This is reflected in the ability of the Responsible Minister to apply conditions to a licence or a permit requiring insurance and indemnities. It is the preference of the New Zealand regulatory regime that the risks associated with activities permitted under the Act are managed first through technical controls , such as compliance with international orbital debris mitigation standards . Please refer to NZSA’s Orbital Debris Mitigation Operational Policy for further detail. The Minister may impose indemnity and insurance requirements if the risk cannot be managed with technical controls alone. In the case of launch licences there will always be a requ irement for indemnity and insurance.
2 1.4 Policy intent To obtain a licence under the Act, applicants must satisfy the Minister that they are technically capable of conducting the activit ies authorised by the licence safely. NZSA will not take a “one size fits all” approach when conducting this assessment and preparing its advice to the Minister. NZSA will give regard to the complexity of the activity proposed when considering the technical capability requirements. This policy is not intended to be prescriptive in its application. The application of this policy is intended to evolve to reflect the development of new technologies and to align with industry best practice. 1.5 Determining technical capability Under the Act, t he Minister may treat licences, permits or other authorisations from other jurisdictions as satisfying some or all of New Zealand’s requireme nts for an applicant to demonstrate technical capability. This does not apply to th e requirements for the grant of a high - altitude licence. For example U.S Federal Aviation Administration launch licences , held by the applicant, may be treated as meeting N ew Zealand’s launch licence requirements relating to technical capability . If an applicant is seeking to rely on a foreign licence , permit or other authorisation to satisfy the technical capability requirement , they should contact NZSA at nzspaceagency@mb ie.govt.nz 1.5.1 The Applicant may demonstrate technical capability through employment or contractual arrangements Applicants must demonstrate t hey have the technical capability necessary to manage the risks associated with the proposed activity. The applicant may demonstrate this through the employment of specialist staff or contractual arrangements, that the technical capability to carry out the activities safely has been met. This may be demonstrated through one or more employed or contracted pe rsons. 1.5.2 How an applicant’s technical capability may be demonstrated: The regulations require every applicant provide certain information about each person whose technical capability they are relying on for the purposes of the application. These include;  The person’s name;  The person’s relationship to the applicant;  Evidence of the person’s relevant qualifications and experience; and
2 Active Debris Removal and On -Orbit Servicing : Operational Policy
2 All AL entitlement weeks not taken would be paid at a rate that is the greater of Ordinary Weekly Leave Pay, Quarterly Average Weekly Earnings and Annual Average Weekly Earnings as if the AL was being taken at the end of employment. 2324 - 2225 6 employment .3 We propose that AL entitlement accrues at a rate of not less than 0.0768 weeks per week of employment . This accrual rate means that employees AL entitlement per year of employment would continue to be approximately four weeks .4 We recommend the periods of employment AL accrues
2 All figures taken from the Survey of Working Life 2018. 3 Based on the total number of employees (2,166,200) minus the number which ‘usually work standard hours’ (1,585,800). 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:06:16
2 Are there other specific types of business arrangements for which compliance with the Act is more difficult?
2 Contents Glossary of terms ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................... 3 Foreword ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 5 Executive Summary and recommen dations ................................ ................................ ................. 6 Section 1: Introduction ................................ ................................ ................................ ................ 13 Summary of the review ................................ ................................ ................................ ........... 13 Scope of the review ................................ ................................ ................................ ................ 14 The review process ................................ ................................ ................................ ................. 14 Overview of the Holidays Act 2003 ................................ ................................ ......................... 15 Section 2: Issues with the current Act ................................ ................................ ......................... 17 Who is affected by the issues with the current Act? ................................ .............................. 17 There are a number of cross -cutting issues with the current Act ................................ .......... 18 Annual holidays – determining entitlements and payments ................................ .................. 18 FBAPS leave (family violence leave, b ereavement leave, alternative holidays, public holidays and sick leave) – determining entitlements and payments ................................ .................... 19 Other issues ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................ 20 Section 3: Feedback from stakeholders on the Issues Paper ................................ ...................... 21 Key themes from the submissions ................................ ................................ .......................... 21 Submissions analysis ................................ ................................ ................................ ............... 21 Suggestions for change ................................ ................................ ................................ ........... 23 Section 4: Options developed and tested ................................ ................................ ................... 25 Section 5: How the Taskforce made its decisions ................................ ................................ ....... 26 Section 6: Final recommendations ................................ ................................ .............................. 28 Process for leave calculations and payments ................................ ................................ ......... 28 Annual holidays entitlements ................................ ................................ ................................ . 32 Annual holidays payments ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 37 FBAPS leave entitlemen ts ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 38 Other proposed changes ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 43 Annex 1: Holidays Act 2003 Review – Terms of Reference ................................ ......................... 48 Annex 2: Entitlements under the Holidays Act 2003 and proposed system ............................... 51 Annex 3: Current record -keeping requirements and proposed additional requirements to reflect the Task force’s recommendations ................................ ................................ .................. 54
2 Family violence leave, Bereavement leave, Alternative holidays, Public holidays and Sick leave.
2 Family violence leave, Bereavement leave, Alternative holidays, Public holidays and Sick leave. 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
2 For example, the Taskforce recommended a reference period of the ‘previous 13 weeks’ for severa l calculations. A literal interpretation would mean that employees would need to split pay period data to calculate back 13 weeks from when the period of leave began. The Bill, like the Act, provides for the basis of all reference periods to be complete pay periods. 6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:12:39
2 Note that Table 1 only includes licensing and permitting activity conducted under the Act (and its regulations). In addition to the above, a further 19 approvals for payload launches were approved by the Minister under the contract which Rocket Lab and the New Zealand Government entered into as an interim measure before the legislative regime had been established and brought into effect. The table does not include applications under assessment , which may or may not be granted , nor discussions with potential applicants pre -application, which may or may not result in the submission of an application.
2 Orbital Debris Mitigation: Operational Policy
2 Payloads of a size les s than 1U : Operational Policy
2 SPBs are covered under the high-altitude licence.
2 Under the Act , entitlements to annual leave are held and paid in units of weeks and entitlements to other leave types are held and paid in units of days. Entitlements (apart from public and alternative holidays) arise as a single amount after specified periods of employment. 6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:12:15 I N C O N F I D E N C E 3 I N C O N F I D E N C E Work on the Bill progressed but was paused before the 2023 General Election 14 The previous Government directed officials to draft legislation that reflected the Taskforce’s recommendations. Between 2021 and 2022 MBIE completed a policy design process to develop the tec hnical details required for drafting a Bill. MBIE brought together a small working group of payroll providers and practitioners to support this process . 15 From 2021 to 2023 , the then Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety (WRS) used the authority dele gated by Cabinet to make decisions on technical changes to supplement the Taskforce’s recommendations . These were intended to address areas in the recommendations where the working group had identified ambiguities, gaps, opportunities for simplification and workability issues .3 Drafting of the Bill, which would repeal and replace the Act began in late 2022 but was paused in June 2023 due to reprioritisation of projects before the 2023 General Election . There are opportunities to achieve a better balance between objectives 16 The previous Government had a bottom line of maintaining tripartite consensus. To achieve that, it traded -off simplicity for ensuring that no employee would be worse off than under the current Act, in any circumstances. This commitment constrained the options available for simplification, which, in the New Zealand context, would likely have required a direct trade -off with employee entitlements. The simpler the rules for providing and paying leave entitlements, the more extensive this trade -off with existin g entitlements becomes, particularly for employees with non -standard work and pay arrangements. 17 The Australian National Employment Standards are often referenced as an example of a simpler model that could be adopted in New Zealand, however, this would li kely result in a significant reduction in entitlements for many New Zealand employees . In New Zealand, leave payments reflect variable hours of work and extra payments (such as overtime rates, commission, and allowances) . This results in higher leave payme nts than under the Australian legislation , where annual leave (AL) entitlements and leave payments are based only on an employee’s ordinary hours of work and pay, which are easier to calculate. 18 Despite refinements agreed by the then Minister for WRS before the 2023 General Election, the detailed methodologies and processes agreed by Cabinet in 2020 result in an inevitable amount of complexity. In some cases, they would also still not be readily implementable in payroll systems (particularly those used by sm all businesses) and would increase the cost of compliance and of providing leave entitlements. 19 Further simplification is possible. It is my view that there are opportunities to simplify the provisions while still maintaining employees’ overall level of ent itlement and the underlying entitlements model, which is what I am proposing in this paper. To make the provisions substantially simpler would require redefining the trade -offs between the objectives and would result in some groups of employees facing redu ctions in entitlements. It would also take substantially longer before stakeholders see any progress because officials would need to revise key aspects of the design work.
2 h. are readily applicable to the full range of working and remuneration arrangements in the labour market both now and in the future i. aim to prote ct overall entitlements for employees . Scope and parameters 8. The Review will retain the purpose of the current Act (in section 3) and (at least) the current levels of entitlements ( such as four weeks’ annual holidays, five days ’ sick leave ). 9. The Group will consider: a. options to improve both the provi sion of, and payment for, entitlements that meet the objectives set out in paragraph 7, and : i. where trade -offs between competing objectives are required, will be explicit about how these are made ii. may include consideration of the place of the standard five day, 40 hour, working week in the Act b. any other matters relating to the Act that it sees fit. This may include holidays and leave entitlements modified by other Acts (such as the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act 1987). 10. The principles set out in paragraph 4 may also be reconsidered , but options must aim to preserve the intent of these as far as possible. 11. The Group will not, however, consider the complex issue of remediation of historical underpayments of holiday and leave pay. Membership and Process 12. The Group will consist represent atives from MBIE, the State Services Commission and Inland Revenue, along with three to four members each representing workers, employers, led by an independent Chair with the power to commission work . 13. The Group will be c haired by Gordon Anderson, a law professor at Victoria University. The Chair is an independent/neutral party in the Group discussions, whose purpose is to facilitate the parties to reach jointly agreed recommendations to Government. 14. The Group is expected to consult widely to get a compre hensive understanding of the issues with the Act, and draw on international examples of holidays and leave legislation where appropriate. 15. The Group is also expected to work closely with technical experts such as payroll providers, business rules specialist s, and service design and delivery specialists to assist with the design and testing of policy options. 16. The Group is required to support their recommendations with quantitative analysis of different options, tested with bona fide payroll data, to ensure th at those options are readily implementable and adverse consequences have been identified. 17. The parties agree that consistency of attendees will be important for the Group to achieve its objectives, and will ensure that representatives will not be chan ged unless this is unavoidable. If any change in representatives is required, the party
2 non-profit organisations
2 or 3 day per week deliveries to each delivery point that received 2 or 3 day per week deliveries as at 30 June 2013
2. Background 1) Radio spectrum contributes to wellbeing and a productive, sustainable and inclusive New Zealand. It can provide economic, cultural, social and environmental benefits. 2) Appendix A: Summary of historical background of radio spectrum provides the historical interaction between Māori and the Crown in relation to radio spectrum. 3) The MSWG considers that:
2. Co nfirm which days are Otherwise Working Days 3. Determine amount of leave being taken (L) in hours Use EA or roster (if known). If not available, average hours worked on the corresponding day in the last 13 weeks 1. Employee applies for leave and confirms date range 4. Determine amount of time in a week (W) in hours 5. Calculate leave as a portion (P) of a week (P=L/W) 6. Calculate and pay the greater of AWE4 or 13*P, AWE52*P and OLP 7. Deduct portion of a week (P) from balance Use EA or roster (if known). If not avail able, average weekly hours over the last 13 weeks Use EA or roster (if known). If not available, use the relevant A/H test or FBAPS leave test 4. Calculate an hourly rate (divide total earnings in last 13 weeks by the total hours worked in the last 13 weeks) Abbreviations ADP = Average Daily Pay A/H = Annual holidays AWE4 or 13 = Average weekly earnings in last 4 or 13 weeks AWE52 = Average weekly earnings in last 52 weeks EA = Employment agreement FBAPS = Family violence leave, bereavement leave, alternative holidays, public holidays, sick leave L = Leave in hours OLP = Ordinary Leave Pay P = Portion of a week W = Working week in hours 5. Calculate and pay the greater of ADP (hourly rate*L) and OLP 6. Deduct relevant days (or part days) from balances FBAPS leave Annual Holidays
2. Co nfirm which days are Otherwise Working Days 3. Determine amount of leave being taken (L) in hours Use EA or roster (if known). If not available, average hours worked on the corresponding day in the last 13 weeks 1. Employee applies for leave and confirms date range 4. Determine amount of time in a week (W) in hours 5. Calculate leave as a portion (P) of a week (P=L/W) 6. Calculate and pay the greater of AWE4 or 13*P, AWE52*P and OLP 7. Deduct portion of a week (P) from balance Use EA or roster (if known). If not avail able, average weekly hours over the last 13 weeks Use EA or roster (if known). If not available, use the relevant A/H test or FBAPS leave test 4. Calculate an hourly rate (divide total earnings in last 13 weeks by the total hours worked in the last 13 weeks) Abbreviations ADP = Average Daily Pay A/H = Annual holidays AWE4 or 13 = Average weekly earnings in last 4 or 13 weeks AWE52 = Average weekly earnings in last 52 weeks EA = Employment agreement FBAPS = Family violence leave, bereavement leave, alternative holidays, public holidays, sick leave L = Leave in hours OLP = Ordinary Leave Pay P = Portion of a week W = Working week in hours 5. Calculate and pay the greater of ADP (hourly rate*L) and OLP 6. Deduct relevant days (or part days) from balances FBAPS leave Annual Holidays 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
2. Competitive business settings
2. Confirm which days are Otherwise Working Days 3. Determine amount of leave being t aken (L) in hours Use EA or roster (if known). If not available, average hours worked on the corresponding day in the last 13 weeks 1. Employee applies for leave and confirms date range 4. Determine amount of time in a week (W) in hours 5. Calculate leave as a portion (P) of a week (P=L/W) 6. Calculate and pay the greater of AWE4 or 13*P, AWE52*P and OLP 7. Deduct portion of a week (P) from balance Use EA or roster (if known). If not available, average weekly hours over the last 13 weeks Use EA or roster (if known). If not ava ilable, use the relevant A/H test or FBAPS leave test 4. Calculate an hourly rate (divide total earnings in last 13 weeks by the total hours worked in the last 13 weeks) Abbreviations ADP = Average Daily Pay A/H = Annual holidays AWE4 or 13 = Average weekly earnings in last 4 or 13 weeks AWE52 = Average weekly earnings in last 52 weeks EA = Employment agreement FBAPS = Family violence leave, bereavement leave, alternative holidays, public holidays, sick leave L = Leave in hours OLP = Ordinary Leave Pay P = Portion of a week W = Working week in hours 5. Calculate and pay the greater of ADP (hourly rate*L) and OLP 6. Deduct relev ant days (or part days) from balances FBAPS leave Annual Holidays
2. Confirm which days are Otherwise Working Days 3. Determine amount of leave being t aken (L) in hours Use EA or roster (if known). If not available, average hours worked on the corresponding day in the last 13 weeks 1. Employee applies for leave and confirms date range 4. Determine amount of time in a week (W) in hours 5. Calculate leave as a portion (P) of a week (P=L/W) 6. Calculate and pay the greater of AWE4 or 13*P, AWE52*P and OLP 7. Deduct portion of a week (P) from balance Use EA or roster (if known). If not available, average weekly hours over the last 13 weeks Use EA or roster (if known). If not ava ilable, use the relevant A/H test or FBAPS leave test 4. Calculate an hourly rate (divide total earnings in last 13 weeks by the total hours worked in the last 13 weeks) Abbreviations ADP = Average Daily Pay A/H = Annual holidays AWE4 or 13 = Average weekly earnings in last 4 or 13 weeks AWE52 = Average weekly earnings in last 52 weeks EA = Employment agreement FBAPS = Family violence leave, bereavement leave, alternative holidays, public holidays, sick leave L = Leave in hours OLP = Ordinary Leave Pay P = Portion of a week W = Working week in hours 5. Calculate and pay the greater of ADP (hourly rate*L) and OLP 6. Deduct relev ant days (or part days) from balances FBAPS leave Annual Holidays 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
2. Establish a world-leading regulatory environment for space and advanced aviation
2. Evaluation background and purpose
2. Note that the Holidays Act T askforce submitted its report to me in October 2019 and has proposed an improved status quo which retains the existing units of entitlement (weeks for annual holidays, days for other types of leave) and focuses on addressing known issues with the Act by pr oviding greater certainty
2. Submit your completed application form to
2. The issues with the current Holidays Act 2003 are well documented. The lack of clarity and certainty associated wi th the current Act make it difficult to implement for employers and hard for employees to be sure they are receiving their correct statutory entitlements (such as the correct amount of annual holidays, and the pay associated with this).
2.3 What is the policy problem or opportunity? A number of issues have been identified with the Act that ma ke it difficult to implement in practice. Chief among these is that there is often a lack of prescription, particularly in how entitlements should be provided and how they are to be paid. For example, the Act does not prescribe how to determine what a ‘week’ is for the purposes of annual holidays or an ‘otherwise working day’ for other forms of leave, and is silent on how to include some types of payments, such as bonuses, in payment calculations. The result is that current provisions generally work for a standard five day, 40 hour week, but pose a number of issues when applied to more diverse working arrangements and variable pay structures. Another key issue with the legislation is that it can be complex for employers understand and apply . Many employers struggle with the many payment calculations (there are at least 10) and knowing when to use them. A common example is not knowing when to use ‘relevant daily pay’ and ‘average daily pay’ when calculating payments for public holidays and sick, bereavement and family violence leave. There is also a lack of clarity over certain terms used in the Act. For example, it is not entirely clear what ‘intermittent or irregular’ means in relation to work patterns or what is mean by ‘regular’ in relation to determining what income should be in cluded in payment calculations. The e ffect of the Act’s lack of prescription, simplicity and clar ity is that: 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:06:16
20 Application to register a company under s12(1) and register an overseas company under s336(1) of the Companies Act. 21 Registration of an annual return under s214(1) and overseas company under s340(1) of the Companies Act. 22 Application Processing Interface (API). 28 requiring significant resource. This service will not attract any levies as the y will be charged when the new ly formed company pays its annual return fee. Restoration The proposed fee is comparatively high because this service requires the Companies Office to consider applications, advertise proposed restorations, and consider any objections that may be received before determining whether a company should be restored. T he process across the Companies and Incorporated Societies registers is the same and therefore it is proposed to provide the same fee of $ 225.00 for both registers. Fees to be revoked Over time Companies Office services have moved from paper -based to online. The Companies Act 1993 Regulations 1994 currently prescribe fees for services that are no longer delivered by the Companies Office or are delivered differently compared to when they were introduced. Table 10 below summarises the fees proposed to be revoked from those regulations. Table 10: Proposed Companies register fees to be revoked Personal Property Securities The Personal Property Securities register (PPSR) was established under the Personal Property Securities Act 1999 to provide an efficient system to register security interests in personal property and for this information to be easily searchable. Table 1 1 below shows the proposed adjustments to current fees paid for services on the PPSR register. Table 1 1: Proposed fees for Personal Property Securities register services $ (excluding GST) Personal Property Securities register Unit Cost Proposed fee Proposed levies Proposed total charge Current charge (fee) Change in charge % change Registration/renewal financing statement 7.88 8.00 - 8.00 14.00 (6.00) (43%) Registration/renewal financing statement – API 4.87 5.00 - 5.00 7.00 (2.00) (29%) Basic search – internet 1.93 2.00 - 2.00 2.00 - - Basic search – API 1.03 1.00 - 1.00 1.00 - - Description of service Current fee – $ (GST exclusive ) Reason for revoking Photocopy made by the public 0.17 Service no longer provided. Photocopy made by the Registrar 0.89 Service no longer provided. For any other electronic search 4.44 This fee was established for web -based searching for finance statements under the Personal Property Securities Act 1999. The service is no longer provided. Manual search of the Companies register 8.89 Service no longer provided because Companies register is an online register only. 29 Registration and renewal fees (including API) We propose a decrease in the PPSR registration and renewal fees for single and API transactions. The current fees set in 2017 included a level of IT development cost to replace the register and that work has now been completed. In addition, forecast higher registration and renewal volumes have resulted in a lower unit cost . Search fee (including API) Basic internet searches of the PPSR and API searches are charged at different amounts. The unit cost has remained stable with cost increases offset by the increase in volumes. The difference in fees reflects the cost of the search functionality using the A PI being spread over 3.2 million searches, versus the lower volume of 5 70,000 public basic searches. Fees to be revoked The Personal Property Securities Regulations 2001 currently prescribe fees for services that are no longer delivered by the Companies Office or are delivered differently compared to when they were introduced. Table 1 2 below summarises the fees proposed to be revoked. Table 1 2: Proposed PPSR register fees to be revoked
20 Proposed options for Companies Office levies and fees Section 4: Current and proposed levies Three levies (two new levies and one current levy) with distinct purposes are proposed to recover costs from a group of users across various registers. Table 3 below summarises the proposed levy amounts and level of revenue forecast to be collected from each type. Table 3: Summary of proposed levies Levy type Type of Costs Current levy ($) Proposed levy ($) Approximate forecast revenue ($m) % of total budget10 Companies Office levy Companies Office shared registry systems - 15.00 10.9 25% NZBN levy NZBN register - 12.00 8.7 21% Insolvency Practitioners (IP) levy IP oversight scheme 1.00 1.00 0.7 2% Total costs recovered from levies 20.3 48%
20 What changes would make the Act easier to apply to workers who receive variable pay (e.g. workers paid by commission )?
20 What changes would make the Act easier to apply to workers who receive variable pay (e.g. workers paid by commission)?
20 hours, as using ADP to calculate their pay treats all days equally , regardless of how much is earned on each specific day. Partial sick leave days 63. Currently, t he Act describes sick leave and family violence leave entitlements in terms of days, and does not divide those entitlements into smaller units, such as part days or hours. In practice, the Taskforce understands that some employees and employers may agree t o account for the sick or family violence leave entitlement in hours or part -days. However, the Act does not explicitly allow for these forms of leave to be taken in units of less than a day. 64. For example, if an employee works for part of the day and then goes home sick, this may be counted as using a whole day of sick leave, no matter how much of the day the employee has worked before going home. This can lead to an employee using their full sick leave entitlement of five days when in fact they have only b een off sick for parts of these five days. Other issues 65. The Taskforce is aware of a number of other issues that are not specifically related to entitlements and payments for annual holidays and FBAPS leave . 66. For ex ample, people who work a Monday to Friday f ive-day week observe all public holidays regardless of the day that they fall on. This does not apply to other working arrangements (i.e. if somebody regularly works weekends but not Mondays).
20 hours, as using ADP to calculate their pay treats all days equally , regardless of how much is earned on each specific day. Partial sick leave days 63. Currently, t he Act describes sick leave and family violence leave entitlements in terms of days, and does not divide those entitlements into smaller units, such as part days or hours. In practice, the Taskforce understands that some employees and employers may agree t o account for the sick or family violence leave entitlement in hours or part -days. However, the Act does not explicitly allow for these forms of leave to be taken in units of less than a day. 64. For example, if an employee works for part of the day and then goes home sick, this may be counted as using a whole day of sick leave, no matter how much of the day the employee has worked before going home. This can lead to an employee using their full sick leave entitlement of five days when in fact they have only b een off sick for parts of these five days. Other issues 65. The Taskforce is aware of a number of other issues that are not specifically related to entitlements and payments for annual holidays and FBAPS leave . 66. For ex ample, people who work a Monday to Friday f ive-day week observe all public holidays regardless of the day that they fall on. This does not apply to other working arrangements (i.e. if somebody regularly works weekends but not Mondays). 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
20% for international productions (25% in certain circumstances)
20-24 year old weekly earnings were $954 in 2022 (up from $890 in 2021).
20. It is also suggested that the definition of ‘gross earnings’ be amended to mean all cash payments received, except direct reimbursements for costs incurred.
20. Term of M emorandum of Understanding 1) This MOU: a) commences upon signing by both parties; and b) may be terminated by the mutual written agreement of the parties or by either party, for a ny reason whatsoever, giving 60 days written notice of termination to the other.
20.3 Reducing the extent to which variable aspects of work and pay are reflected in leave entitlement and pay calculations:
2011 Telecommunications Service Obligation (TSO) Deed for TSO Network Services
2011 Tourism Data Domain Plan
2012 standards policy and infrastructure review
2014 changes to the Companies Act and Limited Partnerships Act
2016 Briefings to Incoming Ministers
2016 Regional Migration Trends
2016 Research, Science and Innovation Domain Plan [PDF 1.2MB]
2016 energy consultations and reviews
2016 review of Section 99(1A) of the Credit Contracts and Consumer Finance Act 2003
2017 Briefings to Incoming Ministers
2017 energy consultations and reviews
2018 Tourism Data Domain Plan
2018 conformance policy and infrastructure review
2018-2019 Electricity Price Review
2019 - Digital twin workshop hosted by Wellington City Council where the concept of a national digital twin of infrastructure is tabled and discussed.
2019 conformance system strategy
2019-2025 international tourism forecasts
2020 - Digital twin hub Australia New Zealand launched by Smart Cities Council ANZ to provide information, resources, access to networks, and host events and forums in support of progressing the adoption of digital twin.
2020 - Infrastructure NZ webinar on the value of a digital twin.
2020 Briefings to Incoming Ministers
2020 Fellowships Impact evaluation
2020 Implementation review
2020 support - Tourism Recovery Package
2020-2023 Review of the Crown Minerals Act 1991
2021 - Aotearoa Digital Twin Summit hosted by Smart Cities Council ANZ and Aurecon.
2021 - Launch of the 2021 Digital Twin challenge across ANZ by Smart Cities Council ANZ as an 18 month immersive programme for leading councils and government agencies to develop and deliver digital twin innovation for all.
2021 - Release of ANZ digital twin stratergy blueprint, Smart Cities Council ANZ.
2021 and 2022 NASA JPL interns
2021 support - Tourism Communities: Support, Recovery and Re-set Plan
2022 - Aotearoa NZ Digital Twin Summit hosted by Smart Cities Council ANZ and Aurecon.
2022 Briefings to Incoming Ministers
2022 NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) Intern
2022/2023 Non-departmental appropriations reports
2023 - Contruction Sector Accord releases "Digital Mapping for the Contruction Sector" report, cross government review of the current state of development of a pan-sector digital North Star including with respect to digital twin."]
2023 - Digital Twin Partnership New Zealand is launched as a volunteer led industry group with a vision to accelerate the adoption of digital twin as a tool for growth and prosperity by creating deep and diverse connections between people and across organisations.
2023 - NZ Data and Digital Twin Summit hosted by Smart Cities Council ANZ and BECA.
2023 Briefings to Incoming Ministers
2023 JPL interns with NASA Administrator Senator Bill Nelson, NASA Deputy Administrator Pamela Melroy, and Head of New Zealand Space Agency Iain Cossar.
2023 NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) Interns
2023 Public Perceptions of Immigration Survey: Summary Report
2023/2024 non-departmental appropriations reports
2024 Briefings to Incoming Ministers
2024 Financial Services Reforms
2024 Proposed amendments to the Crown Minerals Act 1991
2024-25 Capital Markets Reforms
2024-25 financial services reforms
2025 Briefings to Incoming Ministers
20XXXX; 2103XX; 2107XX; 2111XX;
21 Section 3: Feedback from stakeholders on the Issues Paper 67. The Taskforce received a good response to the Issues Paper , with 87 substantive submissions received. The submissions covered a variety of issues, ranging from a focus on a single specific issue, to comments relating to many aspects of the Act and suggestions for new systems to replace the existing Act. Key themes from the submissions 68. The ‘headline’ messages that came through from the submissions were:  strong support for a more prescriptive approach (whatever shape this took)  strong support for a simplified s ystem with fewer calculations  strong support for an accrual -based system (similar to the Australian system)  strong support for a system based on hours . 69. The CTU consulted with its individual affiliates and submitted their feedback directly through its rep resentation on the Taskforce. The CTU unions:  strongly supported greater guidance and prescription in those areas where there is current employer non -compliance  strong ly support ed maintaining a universal leave entitlement based on service  strong ly support ed maintain ing leave balances in weeks (annual leave) and days (FBAPS)  strong ly support ed greater transparency through the provision of enhanced payslips and better access to leave transaction histories. Submissions analysis 70. A total of 87 submissions on th e Taskforce’s Issues Paper were received , including five late submissions received after the closing date . Of the 87 submissions , 50 were submitted directly to the Secretariat as ‘standalone’ submissions , while 37 were submitted via MBIE’s online response form. 71. The 87 submissions comprised:  41 submissions from employers  13 from payroll practitioners or providers  14 from individuals  19 from other groups or organisations (such as law and accounting firms submitting based on their clients’ experiences). 72. The va st majority of submissions (80) expressed support for the broad content of the Issues Paper. Three did not agree with the Issues Paper, and four did not give a position either way. 73. The Secretariat analysed the submissions accord ing to a number of themes, broadly correspond ing to the differe nt sections of the Issues Paper . Some key points from the submissions are set out below:  Cross -cutting issues with the Act – there was general agreement that elements of the current Act are confusing and that the lack of prescription in certain areas makes it hard to comply with the Act.
21 The consultation document seeks feedback on whether the changes proposed in the Bill or alternative options strike the most appropriate balance between the following policy objectives: 21.1 Simple but clear: new frameworks, processes, rules, and criteria should be as simple as possible, while providing clarity and certainty for employers about their obligations and rights. 21.2 Workable: changes should be readily implementable in existing payroll systems where possible (including those used by large and small businesses), with minimal additional ongoing administrative burden, implementation requirements and compliance costs. 21.3 Flexible and future proof: provisions should be applicable to the full range of complex working and remuneration arrangements in the labour market both now and in the future, and support flexibility where it is appropriate for employers and employees to adopt an approach that suits their circumstances. 21.4 Proportionality of entitlements and obligations: changes should appropriately balance interests between parties, specifically between the provision of entitlements and transparency for workers and compliance costs for employers. 22 Making more significant changes such as those in paragraph 20 above would require additional time for further policy design, testing, and legislative drafting. Significant changes would delay the introduction of the Bill. We would need to be confident that delaying the Bill would enable us to deliver the best outcomes for those who are impacted by, and work with, the legislation. To help inform these decisions at the end of the consultation, participants will be asked to list the top issues they would prioritise and why. 23 I seek Cabinet agreement for officials to make minor and editorial changes to the consultation document before it is released for targeted consultation. I N C O N F I D E N C E 4 3u22ohzj22 2024-09-25 17:37:38 Confidential advice to Government Confidential advice to Government I N C O N F I D E N C E MBIE officials have selected a representative sample of stakeholders 24Public interest in having a say during consultation has been overwhelmingly positive. During the registration window from 5 June 2024 to 8 July 2024, 773 individuals completed a registration of interest in participating in the consultation. Interest was spread across a good range of employers, employees, and technical experts, across various industries, sectors, and population groups. 25I have recommended, and Cabinet has previously noted, that MBIE will undertake a targeted consultation in order to ensure officials are able to deliver advice following submissions in a timely manner, and to help us stay on track to deliver legislative change by the end of this term. 26MBIE officials have selected 100 individuals from this group to provide a balance of diverse perspectives and technical expertise. A sample size of 100 provides an appropriate balance between quality of feedback and a manageable workload in terms of analysing submissions within the timeframe. 27Of the 100 participants, 40 have been selected for their technical expertise (such as pay system providers, payroll professionals, legal practitioners, human resource providers and accountants), 35 reflect an employer perspective, with a strong focus on small and medium businesses, and 25 reflect an employee perspective. Representative bodies have been included in each group. There is a good spread across industries and representation of population groups within the 100. 28Given the significant interest from the public, there may be some stakeholders who will be disappointed that they were not chosen to participate in the targeted consultation. However, I want to make clear that the public will be able to have their say on final Cabinet policy decisions when the Bill goes through Select Committee. Undertaking full public consultation before the Select Committee stage risks delaying progress on legislative change. I will report back to Cabinet in December 2024 on feedback themes and proposed policy direction 29After the consultation closes, officials will analyse the consultation feedback, and provide me with a summary report and advice on options. In December 2024, I will report back to Cabinet on the feedback themes and proposed policy direction. This report back will also provide information on the timing for finalising the Bill. Cost-of-living Implications 30The purpose of the consultation is to seek feedback on potential costs and impacts of proposed changes in the Bill and alternative options. If required, I will provide further details on cost-of-living implications when I seek final policy decisions from Cabinet in February 2025. Financial Implications 31The proposals in the Bill will require many changes to different aspects of pay and leave systems for employers, including the government as an employer.3 The cost of 3 As noted in the September 2022 final report back to Cabinet on the All of Government Payroll Programme to improve government payroll systems, many government agencies’ payroll systems are bespoke and aging, and already struggling to adapt to ongoing changes [GOV-22-MIN-0036]. I N C O N F I D E N C E 5 3u22ohzj22 2024-09-25 17:37:38 I N C O N F I D E N C E implementation will vary for employers depending on a range of factors, including the type of payroll system they currently use to manage pay and leave. 32 To help build an understanding of the likely scale of costs, the consultation document asks targeted questions to elicit more details from employers and payroll providers about the anticipated significance of the changes required to business processes and/or systems to implement the proposed changes. MBIE also intends to work with the Public Service Commission and Treasury to develop a tailored questionnaire for public service agencies, seeking information about the costs and implementation considerations for government employers, to inform future advice. Legislative Implications 33 The Bill, when finalised, is proposed to repeal and replace the Act because the proposed changes represent a fundamental change to the legislation and this approach provides scope to modernise the legislation. The Bill retains provisions in the Act unaffected by Cabinet decisions. The Bill will ultimately be binding on the Crown but, like the Act, will not apply to the Armed Forces as defined in section 2(1) of the Defence Act 1990 . 34
2100 MHz 1970 -1980 and 2160 -2170 MHz As soon as practical 2300 MHz 2370 -2395 MHz As soon as practical 3.5 GHz 100 MHz in the range 3.4 -3.8 GHz, with specific frequency be agreed 1 November 2022
2101XX; 2105XX; 2109XX; 23XXXX
22 Two high profile examples in the public sectors are NZ Police and MBIE. NZ Police have paid out approximately $39 million to its staff (and there are more payments to come). The breaches related to issues such as payment for public holidays and alternative holidays and the inclusion of allowances in relevant daily pay. MBIE’s payroll review project is still underway and so the extent of the remediation is not yet know n, but the breaches relate to issues such as calculation of relevant daily pay, failure to compare ordinary weekly pay and average weekly earnings, and record keeping obligations . 23 The outstanding liability across the state sector is not known. The NZ Police payment is by far the largest to date. Three other agencies have made pay outs, but these were very small in comparison (the largest was around $5,000). However, there are many remediation projects underway (such as MBIE’s) and the extent of underpayments of these will not be known until they are completed. s 9(2)(g)(i) s 9(2)(g)(i) There are issues with both the implementation of the legislation ... 24 MBIE’s 2014 engagement work with payroll providers and employers concluded that there are three broad reasons underlying the poor implementation of the legislation: 24.1 There is limited capability, effort and resources applied to comply with the Act ; for example: 24.1.1 payroll systems not correctly configured to support compliance 24.1.2 employers taking a ‘set and forget’ approach to their payroll systems, not recognising that systems will often require manual intervention 24.1.3 an underskilled and undervalued pa yroll profession 24.2 Employer practices, employment arrangements and the Act are not well aligned; for example: 24.2.1 poor record keeping practices 24.2.2 poor business processes meaning that payroll does not necessarily have all of the relevant information from across the business needed to comply 24.2.3 there is increasing flexibility in work and pay arrangements in the labour market and the Act is more complex to apply when these are complex and/or variable 24.3 Adequate information and guidance is not readily available to assist employers, employees and payroll providers. 25 Poor record keeping and inaccessible records also mean that employees struggle to understand their entitlem ents or detect non-compliance. A result of this is that there is relatively little case law on Holidays A ct interpretation issues. … and the legislation itself 26 The Act itself is generally straightforward to apply when work and pay arrangements are consistent and predictable; for example, same hours and days each week for the same pay. This is because, despite amendments designed to cater for non-standard working arrangements, the fundamental design of the legislation is predicated on a standard five day, 40 hour working week. 27 The Act is mor e difficult to apply when hours are variable or unpredictable from week to week, and when remuneration arrangements are complex ( for example, when they include bonuses, commissions, or other incentive payments). This is primarily because the Act is based on two key principles relating to entitlements and pay: 27.1 that entitlements are determined in relation to the work pattern at the time the leave is taken (so that entitlements are not affected by changes in work pattern) 27.2 that employees should not be financially disadvantaged by taking leave, that is , they should be paid (at least) what they would have earned had they worked. 28 This requires a number of judgements to be made based on the specific facts of an employee’s working and remuneration arrangements, and often the agreem ent of the employee is required. In situations in which it is not clear how the entitlement is to be provided, the Act does not provide any prescription. It is simply left to the employer and employee to reach agreement and this is rarely done. Instead, either the employer makes a determination, or the payroll system relies on available information which may no longer be accurate. The requirements for employers to use judgement or reach agreements with their employee are difficult to systematise and payroll systems are often configured around assumpt ions or agreements which later shift. 29 An example of this difficulty is defining a ‘week’ for the purpose of the annual holidays entitlement when it is not obvious (for example, if employees work on a roster pattern that does not fit a weekly cycle, or they work variable hours from week to week). The Act provides no guidance on how to achieve this, relying instead on employers and employees reaching agreement on ‘what genuinely constitutes a working week’ for the employee at the time the leave is taken. 30 Further complexity arises from the units for holidays and leave entitlements in the Act and the number of different calculations for holidays and leave pay. The Act uses weeks and days as units for the entitlements it provides, but most payroll systems use hours as the fundamental unit . It is therefore common practice to calculate leave in hours and convert to the other units. There are significant issues with the conversion taking place accurately when circumstances change. And there are seven different pay calculations in the Act. In some cases it is unclear which calculation should be used, and many employers are not using the correct calculations at the correct times. 31 The combined effect of these issues is that: 31.1 many employees are not receiving their correct entitlements (in many cases they are receiving less than the statutory minima) 31.2 employers and employees do not have certainty regarding the provision of, and payment for, entitlements 31.3 employers, particularly those with large numbers of employees on variable work and pay arrangements , can incur relatively high compliance costs to comply with the Act 31.4 the Act cannot be readily systematised in a payroll system 31.5 many employers are carrying a liability on their books that cannot be readily quanti fied (and may change significantly when employees change their work patterns). Previous attempts to resolve the problem have not resulted in an enduring solution 32 The most significant recent reviews of the Holidays legislation have been the 2001 review that r esulted in the 2003 Act, and the 2009 review that resulted in a series of amendments in 2010. The 2003 Act replaced the Hol idays Act 1981 which had also been subject to a number of reviews. 33 These reviews had similar objectives, namely to make the legislation easier to understand and apply and to make it more applicable to a wider range of working patterns beyond the standard five day, 40 hour working week. It is fair to say that both of these reviews failed to meet these objectives. 34 There appear to be three key reasons why these reviews failed: 34.1 employer and employee representatives held fundamentally different views on the possible outcomes of a review and could not reach agreement 34.2 policy options were never tested in payroll systems with real payroll data to determine how easy it would be to implement them in those systems and to identify adverse consequences ( that is , service design and delivery people were not adequately involved in the pol icy design process) 34.3 the compliance costs of requiring employers and employees to agree matters – often each time an employee requests leave – were not adequately considered. 35 In addition, the second review was constrained by its terms of reference (it could only look at payment for holidays and leave, not how the entitlements were provided). 36 Aside from these reviews, the main intervention to date has been the Labour Inspectorate’s Payroll Strategy referred to above. This was designed to address the issues relating to implementation of the current Act. In addition to the programme of audits and investigations, the Strategy involved: 36.1 an extensive stakeholder engagement/co-design programme to better equip businesses to comply 36.2 a proactive information and educati on programme. 37 This Payroll Strategy work is now complete, though a small team focusing on audits and investigations remains within the Inspectorate. An example of this work is the publication of revised guidance on compliance with the Act produced in colla boration with employer and employee representatives, payroll and other business service providers and employment law experts. Stakeholders have reported that this guidance is proving useful but that it also highlights ongoing difficulties with the Act. 38 Any improvements resulting from the Payroll Strategy will remain constrained by the problems with the legislation and the difficulty of systematising entitlements and payments in a payroll system . Many stakeholders, while acknowledging the work undertaken t o date, remain unhappy with the current situation as uncertainty about exactly what is required to be compliant persists. 39 I consider that a proper resolution of these issues will only be achie ved through legislative change. The time is right for a review of the Act 40 There are several reasons why the time is right for a review: 40.1 both employers and employees are ‘feeling the pain’ of current widespread non-compliance and the difficultly of actually complying with the Act and are calling for change 40.2 we have a deeper understanding of the issues with the legislation – and a good understanding of why past reviews have failed – as a result of the work undertaken over the last few years 40.3 we have developed good relationships with a wide range of stakeholders as a result of the Payroll Strategy and can draw on these to develop a piece of legislation that will endure. 41 In December 2017, I received a joint letter from Business New Zealand (Business NZ) and the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions (NZCTU) acknowledging that both employers and employees were affected by the problems with the Act and seeking a meeting to discuss how to establish a process to review the Act. 42 This meeting took place in February 2018 and it was agreed that a workshop would be held, along with offi cials from MBIE, to discuss the outline of a terms of reference for a review. The workshop took place in March 2018 and the positions agreed form the basis of the terms of reference discussed in this paper and attached as Annex One. These terms of reference outline the objectives, scope, and timing for the review. 43 However, if we approach this review as simply fixing the current framework of the Act, I am concerned that we increase the risk of failure to make things better. We need to be aiming for a new, or significantly amended, piece of legislation that is easier to use and designed with the current and future labour market in mind. The Working Group will be tripartite with an independent C hair 44 I propose that the R eview be carried out by a tripartite Working Group led by an independent Chair with the power to commission work, and intend to invite Business NZ and NZCTU to each nominate three to four people to sit on the group in addition to the Government representat ives. I will also make it clear that it will be important that the interests of small businesses are represented on the group. 45 I recommend Gordon Anderson, a professor of law at Victoria University as the Chair of the Group. Professor Anderson has extensi ve experience in employment law , both as an academic and a barrister. He has served as the Asian Vice-President of the International Society for Labour and Social Security Law and is a member of the Advisory Committee of the Labour Law Research network and President of the New Zealand Labour Law Society. Professor Anderson has the support of both the Council of Trade Unions and Business New Zealand. As the C hair of the Working Group, he will be paid in accordance with the Cabinet fees framework for members appointed to bodies in which the Crown has an interest. 46 The Government representatives on the Group will be senior officials from MBIE, the State Services Commission and Inland Revenue. MBIE will provide secretariat support to the Group and will also ensure appropriate structures are in place for agencies to be kept informed o f, and input into, the work of the Group. The Review must demonstrate that the objectives can be met 47 I propose that the objectives of the review be options for change that: 47.1 continue to promote the existing purpose of the Holidays Act 2003 47.2 provide clarity and certainty for employers and employees so that employees receive their correct entitlements 47.3 are simpler than the current Act in relation to provisions of, and payment for, entitlements to holidays and leave 47.4 are readily implementable in a payroll system 47.5 minimise compliance costs for employers 47.6 minimise perverse incentives on employers and employees 47.7 ensure the balance of decision-making between employers and employees when it comes to requests for holidays and leave is appropriately calibrated 47.8 are readily applicable to the full range of working and remuneration arrangements in the labour market both now and in the future 47.9 aim to protect overall entitlements for employees . 48 While some of the objectives are broadly the same as previous reviews, I consider it critical to the success of a review that options are designed and tested by end users ( for example, employers, empl oyees, payroll providers and professionals). It is important that the ease of implementation of options in a payroll system is given high priority. 49 I therefore anticipate that some form of technical reference group will be established as part of the review, consisting of people such as payroll providers (and their software developers), business rules experts (such as those employed at Inland Revenue for the development of tax legislation) and service design and deli very experts to support them with both the design and testing of options. I will expect to see quantitative analysis of different options tested with real payroll data to support the working group’s recommendations. 50 I cannot rule out the possibility that s ome options might leave some employers and employees worse off than now. However, a blanket criterion that no employer or employee be worse off will overly constrain the Review and, given the inherent uncertainty of the current Act in some situations, be hard to determine in all cases. It is important however that the review aims to protect overall entitlements for employees and minimises complia nce costs for employers. The Review must be broad enough to allow for new solutions … 51 The scope of the R eview m ust be sufficiently broad to generate fundamentally new ways of providing for entitlements and pay, while retaining the purpose of the current Act and (at least) the current levels of entitlement. 52 Full consideration must also be given to the issue of desi gning an Act that works equally well for the ever increasing range of different working and pay arrangements that we see in the labour market. This may include consideration of the place of the standard working week in the holidays ’ legislation. 53 The review will also have the scope to consider any other matters relating to the Act that it sees fit, other than those relating to the provision of entitlements and pay. This may include holidays and leave entitlements modified by other Acts (such as the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act 1987). I expect the group to consult widely to get a comprehensive understanding of the issu es with the current legislation, and to draw on examples from overseas jurisdictions. … but will not include the issue of remediation of historical underpayments 54 The scope of the R eview will no t include the issue of remediation of historical underpayments of holiday and leave pay. However, it will be important to provide clear communications around this issue when a review is announced. This issue is addressed further in the ‘Risks’ section below. Indicative t iming and reporting 55 The Group will report back to me with their recommendations within 12 months. This timeframe will give the Group sufficient time to commission work and undertake robust testing of options. 56 The Group will also provide an interim report after six months, so that I can update Cabinet – and the New Zealand public – on the Group’s progress. There are a number of risks associated with a review The Group may be unable to reach consensus on its recommendations 57 Past reviews have shown that it can be difficult to achieve consensus on recommendations to change or amend the holidays’ legislation. While employers and employees appear close together on the need for, and scope of, a review it is quite possible that when it comes to making detailed recommendations, their representatives may be unable to reach consensus (or may leave the hard decisions to Ministers). 58 Past reviews, h owever, have been conducted by independent Ministerial Advisory Groups involving just employers and employees . I intend that for this review Government will be an equal partner on this tripartite working group putting it in a stronger position to influence the development of options. Furthermore, given all that is now known about the compliance issues with the current Act, there is a high level of commitment from all parties to fi nd an enduring solution. Involving payroll providers and other private sector organisations in policy design 59 Concern may be raised that the involvement of payroll providers and other private sector organisations in the design and testing of options may giv e those entities an unfair market advantage when changes to the legislation are implemented. 60 I do not consider this too significant a concern as these organisations will not know what the shape of any final legislative change will be until Parliament passes these changes. In addition, there will be a suitable implementation period following passage of any legislative change for service providers to develop new products to reflect these changes. Conflict of interest management, confidentiality and r egular communication from the Group about its activities and progress could assist in allaying any concerns that do remain. Employers may be reluctant to address current payroll issues 61 Regardless of any changes to the Act, employers retain an obligation to remedi ate employees for historical underpayments of holiday and leave pay and to pay employees correctly until a new piece of legislation is in place. However, employers may be reluctant to put too much further resource into correcting current issues with their payroll systems if they know they are likely to have to change them in the future. 62 It will be important to clearly communicate to employers that this obligation remains. It is likely to be a minimum of two years before new legislation is passed, and this w ill be followed by a suitable implementation period for employers to update/replace their payroll systems. 63 Employers, particularly those that are currently considering purchasing new payroll systems (or making substantive changes to their current ones) will need to consider how best to meet their obligations given the likelihood of legislative change in two to three years’ time . Some employers may find that managing the issues with their payroll systems with manual fixes may be the most effective approach , but, for others , implementing a new system now may be an integral part of correctly remediating employees. 64 In the meantime, the Labour Inspectorate will continue to support employers to remediate employees for historical underpayments (such as through their recently published practice note on estimating arrears), and will continue with their programme of audits and investigations. Consultation 65 The Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet (Policy Advisory Group); State Services Commission; Treasury; Minist ries of Education, Justice, Health, and Social Development; Ministries for Primary Industries, Women, and Pacific Peoples; Inland Revenue; Department of Internal Affairs; T e Puni Kokiri; and N ew Zealand Police have been consulted on this Cabinet paper. 66 The New Zealand Council of Trade Unions and Business New Zealand participated in a workshop (along with MBIE) to outline the key elements of the Terms of Reference in Annex One and have also been consulted on this paper. Financial Implications 67 I propose that MBIE will meet any costs associated with the review (anticipated to be up to $0.5 million) by transferring an anticipated underspend of $0.5 million in the Labour Market Policy Advice and Related Outputs Multi -Category Appropriation in the current financi al year to the 2018/19 financial year. I am seeking delegated authority for the Minister of Finance and I to jointly agree the final amount to be transferred. 68 The likely costs are expected to relate to fees for the Chair, and any costs associated with work that the Chair might commission (including research or legal advice that MBIE agrees to undertake). MBIE will also consider requests to contribute to reasonable travel and accommodation costs f or out of town members where these are consistent with the Cabinet Fees Framework. Costs may also arise from any processes established as part of the review to robustly test options to ensure that they are practical and any adverse consequences are identified (for example, this could include developing a web tool that payroll experts can use to test proposed options with payroll data). Any public consultation undertaken as part of the review will also have cost implications. 69 I do not anticipate that the costs associated with the review will be greater than $0.5 million but if they are, then I may need to seek additional funding to complete the work. Human Rights 70 This proposal has no human rights implications. Legislative Implications 71 This proposal has no legislative implications. However, a review is expected to lead to recommendations for legislative change. Regulatory Impact Analysis 72 Regulatory Impact Analysis requirements do not apply to this proposal, but will be carried out when options for change are brought back to Cabinet. Gender Implications 73 This proposal has no gender implications. Disability Perspective 74 This proposal has no disability implications. Publicity 75 If approved by Cabinet, I intend to announce the establishment of the Holidays Act Working Group shortly after . I will publish this paper and the Terms of Reference on the MBIE website , subject to consideration of any deletions that would be justified if the information had been requested under the Official Information Act 1982. Recommendations The Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety recommends that the Committee: 1 Note that there is compelling evidence of widespread non-compliance with the Holidays Act 2003 2 Note that this non-compliance is due both to poor implementation of the Act and to issues with the Act itself 3 Note that MBIE’s three year payroll strategy was focused on addressing the first reason, but that only a review of the legislation can provide an enduring solution to the non- compliance issues 4 Agree to establish a tripartite Holidays Act Working Group to make recommendations to the Government on options for the provision of, and payment for, holiday and leave entitlements , and on any other matters relating to the Act that the Group sees fit to address, that meet the objectives in the Terms of Reference 5 Agree to the Terms of Reference for the Holidays Act Working Group attached as Annex One 6 Note that membership of the Group will consist of three to four Government representatives from the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment , State Services Commission and Inland Revenue, along with three to four people nominated by each of Business New Zealand and the Council of Trade Unions 7 Agree to the appointment of Professor Gordon Anderson as Chair of the Group 8 Authorise the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety to make minor amendments to the Terms of Reference 9 Agree that the estimated cost of the review, $0.5m, be met by an in -principle expense transfer to 2018/19 of an anticipated 2017/18 underspend in the Vote Labour Market Multi -Category Appropriation: Labour Market Policy Advice and Related Outputs, subject to confirmation of the amount of the expense transfer by joint Ministers (Minister of Finance and Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety) in the October baseline update 10 Invite the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety to report back to Cabinet on the Government response to the Group’s recommendations within 12 months.
22 agencies are paying more than 95% of their invoices within 10 working days.
22  Annual holidays issues – comments from submissions included that : o the various calculations for annual holidays cause confusion about how to use them and when (for instance OWP vs AWE), a nd payroll systems are not a lways able to do this correctly o transfe rring an employee from PAYG to ann ual holidays can be problematic o it is unfair for the entitlement to annual holidays to only arise af ter 12 months o there may be incentives for employees to take leave at particular times.  FBAPS leave issues – comments from submissions included that: o the ‘Mondayisation’ of public holidays is unfair f or those who don’t work Mondays o RDP and ADP ar e confusing and hard to define and can lead to gaming o the l ack of prescription about what an ‘O therwise Working Day’ is leads to non -compliance o it is hard to know when to use ADP – what does ‘possible’ or ‘practicable’ mean? o it is impractical and unfair not to pro-rata sick leave when in reality people do take part days o the six -month stand -down period for sick and bereavement leave is unfair.  Role of the Labour Inspectorate - comments from submissions included that: o the Labour Inspectorate should provide more education and guidance for employer s on how to comply with the Act o future roles for the Labour Inspectorate could include certifying payroll systems, and having the power to issue a binding ruling if an employer and employee agreed on an issue. 74. Key problems with the Act identified by the CTU included:  lack of trans parency and insufficient information on payslips to ascertain if leave has been correctly paid  poor access to leave transaction records in a form that can be easily checked.  employers excluding some components of pay from AWE, OWP or RDP (“switching allowa nces off”)  employer discretion as to when to use RDP or ADP resulting in the lower amount being paid  employers not using averaging to assess OWP when hours worked are variable  employers not following the prescribed method for calculating ADP  inconsistent a pproaches by employers to different types of termination payments: redundancy, gratuities, “golden handshakes” – all of which are forms of delayed remuneration  sick and bereavement leave being denied for “casual” employees  the “pay as you go” provisions be ing used inappropriately  public holiday leave and alternative holidays not being granted when they should
22  Annual holidays issues – comments from submissions included that : o the various calculations for annual holidays cause confusion about how to use them and when (for instance OWP vs AWE), a nd payroll systems are not a lways able to do this correctly o transfe rring an employee from PAYG to ann ual holidays can be problematic o it is unfair for the entitlement to annual holidays to only arise af ter 12 months o there may be incentives for employees to take leave at particular times.  FBAPS leave issues – comments from submissions included that: o the ‘Mondayisation’ of public holidays is unfair f or those who don’t work Mondays o RDP and ADP ar e confusing and hard to define and can lead to gaming o the l ack of prescription about what an ‘O therwise Working Day’ is leads to non -compliance o it is hard to know when to use ADP – what does ‘possible’ or ‘practicable’ mean? o it is impractical and unfair not to pro-rata sick leave when in reality people do take part days o the six -month stand -down period for sick and bereavement leave is unfair.  Role of the Labour Inspectorate - comments from submissions included that: o the Labour Inspectorate should provide more education and guidance for employer s on how to comply with the Act o future roles for the Labour Inspectorate could include certifying payroll systems, and having the power to issue a binding ruling if an employer and employee agreed on an issue. 74. Key problems with the Act identified by the CTU included:  lack of trans parency and insufficient information on payslips to ascertain if leave has been correctly paid  poor access to leave transaction records in a form that can be easily checked.  employers excluding some components of pay from AWE, OWP or RDP (“switching allowa nces off”)  employer discretion as to when to use RDP or ADP resulting in the lower amount being paid  employers not using averaging to assess OWP when hours worked are variable  employers not following the prescribed method for calculating ADP  inconsistent a pproaches by employers to different types of termination payments: redundancy, gratuities, “golden handshakes” – all of which are forms of delayed remuneration  sick and bereavement leave being denied for “casual” employees  the “pay as you go” provisions be ing used inappropriately  public holiday leave and alternative holidays not being granted when they should 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
22. A prescriptive ‘Otherwise Working Day’ test is also proposed for determining when a particular day is an ‘Otherwise Working Day’ for FBAPS purposes. More specifically, employees should be eligible for this type of leave if they wer e expected to have worked on that day or have worked 50% of the corresponding calendar days in either the last four or 13 weeks.
23 For example, the Ministry of Justice stopped processing incoming and outgoing cheques after 31 May 2021 : https://www.justice.govt.nz/about/news -and-media/news/the -ministry -is-phasing -out-payment -by- cheque/ Limited Partnerships register Current fee – $ (GST exclusive ) Reason for revoking Certified copy of finance statement 22.22 Service no longer provided 35 Building Societies, Friendly Societies and Credit Unions The Companies Office maintains a series of small registers for building societies, friendly societies and credit unions to meet the requirements of the Building Societies Act 1965 and the Friendly Societies and Credit Unions Act 1982 (the Act). Table 19: Proposed fees for Building Societies, Friendly Societies, and Credit Unions register services $ (excluding GST) Building Societies register, Friendly Societies register, and Credit Unions register Unit Cost Proposed fee Proposed levies Proposed total charge Current charge (fee) Change in charge % change Registration* 149.73 150.00 27.00 177.00 217.39 (40.39) (19%) Annual return* 9.01 9.00 27.00 36.00 34.78 1.22 4% Annual return – friendly society branch* 9.01 9.00 27.00 36.00 34.78 1.22 4% Registration of an Association of credit unions under section 145(1) of the Friendly Societies and Credit Unions Act* 149.73 150.00 27.00 177.00 355.56 (178.56 ) (50%) *CO levy $15.00, NZBN levy $12.00 Registration and annual return fee The changing business landscape has resulted in less of these types of entities, mean ing fewer registrations and annual returns. This review has highlighted that, as the registered number of these types of entities decline, the entities that remain have to cover costs. The annual return fee portion of the total charge is proposed at $ 9.00, making this equitable with other entity register annual return fees . It is proposed to align the registration of an association of a credit union with the registration fee for the other registers under the two Acts. Proposed changes specific to Credit Unions and Friendly Societies process fees Tables 20 and 2 1 on the next page outline amendments to fees specific to processes for credit unions and friendly societies under the Friendly Societies and Credit Unions Act . These changes are outlined as follows: For Credit Unions, there are two new fees that were enabled under changes to the Act in 2019 (Table 20) : • A new fee f or filing a request to remove a credit union under section 140(2)(b) reflects the change to the Act for a dissolution action for credit unions. The existing fee under 82(3) (as applied by section 135(4)) is being revoked. The new fee is based on the cost of dissolution for a friendly society. • A new fee for filing under section 135C(2) for amalgamations o r transfers of the Act . For Friendly Societies (Table 21) rounding has been applied to a variety of fees other than those in Table 19 to reflect the GST exclusive amount, and then converted back to be GST inclusive for the purpose of inclusion in the new regulations. 36 No levies are proposed to be added to these services . Table 20: New Proposed fees for specific Credit Unio ns register services $ (excluding GST) Credit Unions register Unit Cost Proposed fee Current fee Change in fee % change For filing, under section 140 (2)(b) the Act, where a request to the Registrar is made to remove the credit union from the register. 311.11 310.00 - 310.00 - For filing, under section 135C (2) of the Act, a copy of a special resolution passed for the purpose of amalgamation or transfer of engagements. 355.56 350.00 - 350.00 -
23 was decided that costs would be recovered from third parties. Therefore, since 2017 NZBN register costs have been included within the Companies register fees set in regulations under the Companies Act. In 2019 Parliament decided that the costs of administering the NZBN register should be met from a levy. This proposal implements that decision.15 Who would pay the levy and when The NZBN levy would be prescribed for entities who are eligible and have been assigned an NZBN. It is proposed that the NZBN levy is paid annually by all corporate entities that are registered on a Companies Office entity register and have been allocated an NZBN.16 Like the proposed CO levy the NZBN levy will be charged alongside the relevant register fee for incorporation or registration, and then for each annual return. Unincorporated or unregistered entities such as sole traders, partnerships or trusts will not pay the NZBN levy, on the basis that when the NZBN Act was introduced it was decided that costs for maintaining an NZBN register should not be recovered from this group of users. Their proportion of costs will continue to be funded by the Crown. Cost of the NZBN register to be recovered Table 5 below shows the type and approximate amount of costs of the NZBN register to be recovered from an NZBN levy. Table 5: NZBN Register costs Cost $m Personnel 1.709 IT maintenance and support 2.135 New IT investment 0.700 Education and support 0.871 Depreciation and capital charge 1.834 Other operating costs 0.222 MBIE technical support 1.237 Total cost – levy recovers 8.708 The NZBN levy amount has been derived by dividing the costs by an estimated annual volume of 724,376 , representing registrations and annual return s filed on the entity registers who have an NZBN. Table 6 below shows the proposed levy against the unit cost. Table 6: Proposed NZBN levy NZBN register Unit Cost ($) Proposed levy ($) Current levy NZBN levy 12.02 12.00 - The NZBN levy has been set at $12.00 rather than the unit cost of $12. 02.
23  leave balances being maintained in incorrect units of time, including employers using hours instead of weeks or days, and crediting and debiting balan ces inconsistently to the disadvantage of employees. Suggestions for change 75. The majority of submitters (76) provided specific suggestions or recommendations about changes that could be made to the Act in relation to annual holidays, FBAPS or other provisio ns. Some of the specific suggestions included are outlined b elow by topic area . Suggestions relating to a nnual holidays entitlement s 76. There was some support for an accrual system based on hours because of the simplicity of such a system (i.e. entitlements b uild up from day one). Others proposed using days or even minutes as the units of entitlement. 77. Other suggestions included:  using ‘guaranteed ’ or ‘agreed’ hours in employment agreement s as the basis for determining entitlement (i.e. do not include overtime)  using a statutory minimum number of hours p er 12 months (i.e. rather than four weeks)  differentiat ing between workers with regular hours and workers with variable hours , and using an accrual system for those with variable hours  that the e mployer should no t have to agree to leave being taken  providing more guidance and be tter definitions in relation to issues such as casual employment , what a ‘week’ is for a particular employee, w hich payments should be included in the calculation of the payment rate , and w hat is meant by terms such as 'regu lar' and 'ordinary working day'. Suggestions relating to the c alculation of leave payments 78. There was support for s implify ing the payment calculations for leave. Options proposed included using one rate for all leave or th e greater of a comparison between two rates (for example, of the rate set out in an employment agreement or an average over 12 months). 79. Other suggestions included:  only use Average Weekly Earnings, rather than Ordinary Weekly Pay, because using Ordinary We ekly Pay incentivises taking leave after a spike in payments  using a 'daily rate' (common in the meat industry)  basing l eave payments on gross earnings divided by contracted hours; hours worked over the contracted rate would not accrue more leave, but woul d increase the payment rate  allow ing a ‘cashing up ’ of more than one week of leave  using a four -week average for calculating payments as 52 weeks was too long. Suggestions relating to FBAPS leave 80. A variety of suggestions were received in relation to the tr eatment of FBAPS leave. These ranged from a suggestion to r eplace all forms of FBAPS leave (apart from public holidays) with a single entitleme nt of 10 days of personal leave , to a suggestion to change the qualification period for bereavement leave from si x months to 1,000 hours.
23  leave balances being maintained in incorrect units of time, including employers using hours instead of weeks or days, and crediting and debiting balan ces inconsistently to the disadvantage of employees. Suggestions for change 75. The majority of submitters (76) provided specific suggestions or recommendations about changes that could be made to the Act in relation to annual holidays, FBAPS or other provisio ns. Some of the specific suggestions included are outlined b elow by topic area . Suggestions relating to a nnual holidays entitlement s 76. There was some support for an accrual system based on hours because of the simplicity of such a system (i.e. entitlements b uild up from day one). Others proposed using days or even minutes as the units of entitlement. 77. Other suggestions included:  using ‘guaranteed ’ or ‘agreed’ hours in employment agreement s as the basis for determining entitlement (i.e. do not include overtime)  using a statutory minimum number of hours p er 12 months (i.e. rather than four weeks)  differentiat ing between workers with regular hours and workers with variable hours , and using an accrual system for those with variable hours  that the e mployer should no t have to agree to leave being taken  providing more guidance and be tter definitions in relation to issues such as casual employment , what a ‘week’ is for a particular employee, w hich payments should be included in the calculation of the payment rate , and w hat is meant by terms such as 'regu lar' and 'ordinary working day'. Suggestions relating to the c alculation of leave payments 78. There was support for s implify ing the payment calculations for leave. Options proposed included using one rate for all leave or th e greater of a comparison between two rates (for example, of the rate set out in an employment agreement or an average over 12 months). 79. Other suggestions included:  only use Average Weekly Earnings, rather than Ordinary Weekly Pay, because using Ordinary We ekly Pay incentivises taking leave after a spike in payments  using a 'daily rate' (common in the meat industry)  basing l eave payments on gross earnings divided by contracted hours; hours worked over the contracted rate would not accrue more leave, but woul d increase the payment rate  allow ing a ‘cashing up ’ of more than one week of leave  using a four -week average for calculating payments as 52 weeks was too long. Suggestions relating to FBAPS leave 80. A variety of suggestions were received in relation to the tr eatment of FBAPS leave. These ranged from a suggestion to r eplace all forms of FBAPS leave (apart from public holidays) with a single entitleme nt of 10 days of personal leave , to a suggestion to change the qualification period for bereavement leave from si x months to 1,000 hours. 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
23/24 2225 In Confidence 1 BRIEFING Holidays Act Review: Policy decisions for an exposure draft of the Bill Date: 28 March 2024 Priority: High Security classification: In Confidence Tracking number: 2324 -2225 Purpose This paper seek s your decisions on policy changes relating to the Holidays Act Review . Subject to your agreement, these changes will be included in a paper for Cabinet’s consideration in May 2024 , alongside the proposal to release an exposure draft of the Employment (Leav e Entitlements) Bill, which is intended to replace the Holidays Act 2003 (the Holidays Act) . Executive s ummary We briefed you in December 2023 and February 2024 on our work to review the Holidays Act, noting areas where improvements could be made that go beyond the previous decisions made by Ministers and Cabinet. Since then, we have focused on developing alternatives that would simplify obligations, reduce compliance costs for employers and address areas previously incomplete while broadly aligning with t he Taskforce recommendations and existing entitlements model . You requested that we seek decisions at one time , so this paper brings together our advice on new policy decisions to include in a paper for Cabinet’s consideration in May 2024. The p roposal s, grouped into three areas, are outlined in this cover note, with detailed advice and recommendations set out in the annexed papers. In summary, the proposed changes will: • simplify the framewor k for providing annual leave (AL) entitlement and for paying AL as a regular part of an employee’s pay, and address liability risk s arising from current decisions if employers have a closedown (Annex Two) • consolidate the payment methodology for other leave types so that only one calculation is required, reduce the implementation requirements for determining the use of leave and refine the leave eligibility criteria and accumulation timeframe for sick leave (Annex Three) • update the methodology for determining parental leave payments to reflect existing practice and enable parties to make choices regarding leave entitlements for employees in a restructuring situation (Annex Four). In addition to your decisions on policy chan ges, we are seeking an early indication of your desired approach to consultation on an exposure draft of the Bill that would replace the existing Holidays Act. There are two broad options: public or targeted consultation. Under either option, we can reach out to various stakeholders to ensure a range of voices are heard. On balance, we favour a targeted approach as it will help ensure we are better positioned to deliver a Bill for introduction in early 2025. Once we receive your decisions on this paper, we will incorporate them into a draft Cabinet paper and undertake consultation with other Government agencies. We will also finalise our regulatory impact analysis. We expect to provide a draft Cabinet paper for your consideration , and for Ministerial consult ation , in mid -April.
23/24 2225 In Confidence 10 Annex One: Summary of decisions to date
23/24 2225 In Confidence 11 Annex Two: Providing, taking and paying annual leave
23/24 2225 In Confidence 12 Annex Three: Providing, taking and paying other leave types
23/24 2225 In Confidence 13 Annex Four: Amendments to parental leave and employment relations legislation
23/24 2225 In Confidence 2 Recommended action The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment recommends that you: a Note that since we met with you in late February, our focus has been on progressing alternatives to some of the previous policy decisions on changes to the Holidays Act , in order to simplify obligations, reduce compliance costs for employers , and address areas that were previously incomplete Noted b Note that detailed recommendations on alternative options are provided for y our consideration in each of the three annexed papers , relating to annual leave (Annex Two), other leave types (Annex Three), and amendments to other legislation (Annex Four) Noted c Note that, if you agree, we will include the proposals in a paper for Cabinet consideration in May, alongside proposals for consultation on an exposure draft of the Employment (Leave Entitlements) Bill Noted d Note that, while both public and targeted consultation on the exposure draft would elicit the desired feed back, a more targeted approach consulting a variety of stakeholders identified in consultation with your office will help to ensure we are well placed to deliver a Bill for introduction in early 202 5 Noted e Agree to either: i. public consultation (with targeted communication s to identified stakeholders) Agree / Disagree OR ii. targeted consultation only (based on a stakeholder list compiled in consultation with your office) Agree / Disagree f Note that we are continu ing our engagement with a small worki ng group of representatives from B usiness New Zealand and the Council of Trade Unions who both support further simplification Noted g Note that we expect to provide a draft Cabinet paper (reflecting your decisions above and in the annexed papers) for your comment and Ministerial consultation in mid-April. Noted
23/24 2225 In Confidence 5 circumstances . We are proposing a new consolidated single calculation for FBAPS leave payments . • Methodology for determining the hours an employee would have worked on a day of leave: Cabinet also accepted the recommendation to introduce a new ‘calendar day’ methodology for determining the hours that an employee would have worked on a day of leave. Stakeholders raised concerns that implemen ting this methodology would require significant changes to payroll systems with high associated costs. We propose removing the calendar day methodology for both annual leave and FBAPS leave. • Eligibility criteria for family violence, bereavement and sick le ave: Cabinet also accepted the recommendation for new eligibility criteria to determine employees’ eligibility for FBS leave from their first day of employment. The previous Minister made adjustments to these criteria to improve clarity, but the inclusion of an ‘expectation s- based’ assessment which requires employer judgement , means the eligibility criteria remains complex . We propose removing the expectations -based assessment that occurs on the first day of employment. • Timeframe for accumulation of sick leave: Cabinet also accepted the Holidays Act Taskforce’s recommendation tha t eligible employees become entitled to the full minimum family violence leave and bereavement leave entitlements from their first day of employment, with an accumulat ion period of four months for s ick leave . As s ick leave entitlement has since increased f rom five to ten days per year , you may choose to reconsider the sick leave accumulation period .. 12. The proposed changes are summarised in the table below. Payment methodology consolidation • A revised relevant daily pay calculation made up of base pay and fixed allowances (that will not otherwise be paid during the period of leave) and an average of productivity and incentive payments received. Determining the hours that would have been worked on a day of leave • Removing th e ‘calendar day methodology’ for both annual leave and FBAPS leave (and instead us ing an average of hours worked across all days of the week ). Eligibility criteria FBS leave • Remov ing the expectations -based assessment in the eligibility criteria for family violence, bereavement and sick leave (meaning that only employees with agreed hours will be eligible for FBS leave from day one and others will be subject to eligibility tests after three months) . Timeframe for sick leave accumulation • Two options for accumulating sick leave – either proceeding with previous decisions or accumulating the full entitlement over six months (a longer period) . 13. More detail on these proposals and detailed recommendations for your consideration are provided in Annex T hree. Amendments to parental leave and employment relations legislation (Annex Four ) 14. The paper contained in Annex Four (Amendments to parental leave and employment relations legislatio n) covers two areas: • The methodology for determining parental leave payments: The Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act 1987 relies on the existing Holidays Act definition of “ordinary weekly pay” to calculate parental leave payments. We are proposing to add a standalone formula to parental leave legislation, in order to “disconnect” it from the Holidays Act .
23/24 2225 In Confidence 6 • The tr eatment of leave entitlements in a restructuring situation: There is currently a lack of legislative clarity regarding the treatment of leave entitlements for some employees in a restructuring situation. We are proposing a flexible approach for those employees, enabl ing treatment of entitlements to be negotiated by the incoming and outgoing employers rather than requiring them to be paid out. 15. The proposed changes are summarised in the table below. Methodology for determining parental leave payments (amending the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act 1987 ) • Replace the current reference to “ordinary weekly pay” with a standalone formula that is aligned with the methodology Inland Revenue currently uses • Specify that the formula should reflect a four -week average of gross weekly taxable earnings before the start of parental leave (we are continuing to work with IR on the reference period details). Treatment of leave entitlements in a restructuring situation (amending the Employment Relations Act 2000 ) For employees specified in Schedule 1A of the Employment Relations Act 2000: Approach unchanged , employees are given the choice to transfer employment to the new employer, and if they choose to transfer employment, entit lements are transferred . For other employees: • require the treatment of leave entitlements in restructuring situations to be covered in employment agreements as a matter that will be negotiated between the outgoing and incoming employers , • require the apportionment of liability and the transfer of relevant employee information to be covered in employment agreements as matters that will be negotiated between outgoing and incoming employers, and • specify that the payment rate for transferred leave en titlements must not be less than what it would be if it were paid out in accordance with the Holidays Act at the time of transfer 16. More detail on these proposals and detailed recommendations for your consideration are provided in Annex Four. There are opt ions regarding consultation on the exposure draft 17. In addition to the changes proposed above, w e propose to see k Cabinet approval for an approach to the exposure draft (in the May Cabinet paper) . We discussed this with you briefly at our policy session in late February, and noted your preference to ensure that voices from small business owners are heard . 18. Releasing an exposure draft of the Bill provides an opportunity to test the Bill’s clarity and workability with various interest groups, includi ng those who will need to work with it on a day-to-day basis. It will provide an opportunity to surface issues early, so we can address as much as possible prior to introduction and anticipate feedback that might be raised in Select Committee submissions . 19. Aside from the decisions you make on the attached papers, the exposure draft will largely reflect decisions made by the previous Government, in line with the tripartite consensus - based approach. As discussed with you, w e can use the consultation document to ask targeted questions around alternative options in some areas, such as different accrual models and pro -rata sick leave for part time employees.
23/24 2225 In Confidence 8 We worked with Inland Revenue on the parental leave amendments , with wider consultation to c ome 26. We worked with Inland Revenue (IR) to develop our advice on consequential amendments to the parental leave legislation. IR supports the recommendations contained in the Annex Four paper relating to parental leave . Consultation with wider Government age ncies will be undertaken on the draft Cabinet paper and we will brief you on any concerns raised through that process. We are working towards a Cabinet paper for consideration in May 27. Once we receive your decisions on this paper, we will incorporate them i nto a draft Cabinet paper and undertake consultation with other Government agencies. We will also finalise our regulatory impact analysis and submit a Regulatory Impact Statement to the assessment panel . 28. We expect to provide a draft Cabinet paper for your consideration and for Ministerial consultation in mid -April. An indicative timeline for the May Cabinet paper is as follows: Date Milestone Week of 15 April Draft Cabinet paper provided to Minister’s office 26 April – 9 May Ministerial consultation Tuesday 14 May Final Cabinet paper provided for lodging Thursday 16 May Cabinet paper lodged Wednesday 22 May Cabinet Economic Policy Committee Monday 27 May Cabinet 29. After Cabinet decisions, officials will issue drafting instructions to P arliamentary Counsel Office (PCO) as soon as possible and work with PCO to review drafting and provide feedback. We will also prepare a consultation document to accompany the exposure draft . These stages are set out in the timeline below:
23/24 2225 In Confidence 9 Annexes Annex One: Summary of decisions to date Annex Two: Providing, taking and paying annual leave Annex Three : Providing, taking and paying other leave types Annex Four: Amendments to parental leave and employment relations legislation
230,000 people employed, approx. 8% of total workforce
2324 - 0982 In Confidence 16 Annex T hree : Financial implications and compliance costs 1. The recommendations have financial implications for employers. Improved clarity and certainty through greater prescription should reduce the risk of future non - compliance issues and help to reduce future remediation processes and compliance costs, offsetting some of the cost increases . This is dependent however on the extent to which the legislation is implementation ready and that it does achieve the intended clarity and certainty.
2324 - 0982 In Confidence 17
2324 - 0982 In Confidence 8 providers an d payroll practitioners working for public and private sector employers. The group contributed their insights into the practicalities of implementing the recommendations in payroll systems, and across a variety of complex employment environments.
2324 - 2225 4 • because ADP is calculated as an average across all days of work, its value is the same for any day of FBAPS leave regardless of how much an employee would have earned on a specific day. If an
2324 - 2225 7 with this decision , the hours will instead be based on an employee’s average hours across all days worked in the pay periods that started in the 13 weeks before the one in which the l eave is taken. This means that employers will only be required to make one calculation for all days of annual leave in a pay period. Each day of annual leave will have the same number of hours assigned to it. 25. The s ame simplification was not made to the methodology for calculating the hours that would have been worked on
2324- 0982 In Confidence 1
2324- 0982 In Confidence 10 39. The recommendations also involve compliance costs for employers (refer to Annex Three for more detail on the financial implications). Despite refinements to simplify some key areas of concern,3 the changes required to payroll systems are still likely to be significant. The recommendations also include some increases in access to entitlements and leave payments. Compliance requirements and costs will vary depending on situation- specific factors such as employer size, the types and complexity of working arrangements and pay structures , the nature of the payroll system used and whether dedicated payroll profe ssionals are part of staff . 40. There is potential for further modifications or alternatives to some of the Taskforce’s recommendations to simplify the changes to the Act and better address the associated risks. Options b or c would both provide opportunity to consider other options for change that would achieve more balance between the Taskforce’s objectives than the currently agreed package of changes. Maintaining consensus between business and union representatives 41. Cabinet asked the Taskforce to aim to provide jointly agreed recommendations. In 2019, the Taskforce would not have reached consensus on any recommendations that moved away from the underlying framework of the Act ( based on leave entitlements provided after set periods , and measured in weeks and days) . 42. Employee representatives are likely to continue to oppose a fundamentally different basis for providing leave entitlements, such as an hours -based accrual model that many employers and payroll providers have suggested could provide a simpler model (option c). Their opposition is driven by the potential impacts on the principles of the current Act (set out in paragraph 6) and therefore the current level of worker entitlements the Act provides. 43. During the election period we have continued our engagement with BusinessNZ and NZCTU’s nominated representatives on the Bill. BusinessNZ is supportive of an exercise to review whether the 2019 recommendations represent the best solution to the issues. Given the challenges highlighted during the policy design and drafting processes, both they and NZCTU representatives have given an initial indication that they are willing to consider alternative options that broadly align with the recommendations (option b ). These options would retain the current units of entitlement and the underlying framework of the Act but better balance the changes across the objectives Cabinet set for the Taskforce (particularly by reducing the overall level of complexity ). Considering other options for change will take time to progress 44. Options b or c would require more time to progress than option a. They would involve policy development and Cabinet processes, issuing of new drafting instructions, and potentially significant redrafting work by PCO (noting however that work to complete the Bill within the current policy decisions is also significant). Option c is likely to require the most time as it requires development of a fundamentally new model for providing and paying leave entitlement s and could also be complex . A robust design and testing process would be required to mitigate the risk of new, unforeseen ambiguities and challenges . 45. Taking more time on the policy process now does mean the challenges of the current Act will remain for longer. Until new legislation comes into force employers need to comply with the current Act and, like historical underpayments, will become liable to remediate employees for any underpayments during that time . However, taking longer on the development of solutions
2324- 0982 In Confidence 11 now is more likely to achieve the desired outcomes and reduce compliance costs in the longer term. 46. As a balance between taking time to get it right and immediately progressing changes to improve the legislative framework, we recommend option b as a practical next step. Work carried out since the release of the Taskforce report, including refinements to address gaps in the Taskforce’s recommendations and simplify matters where possible is not yet public. Along with any further work you would like us to progress, the resulting Bill may be more positively received than what is presented in the Taskforce report. As discussed below, there are also options for the legislative process that would allow us to continue exploring alternatives with stakeholders before a final decision is made. Steps in the legislative process 47. Once the policy is settled and a Bill is complete, you have some choices about the steps in the legislative process. Broadly your choices are to: • Progress a Bill towards introduction and select committee : this option would provide the fastest progress . Any issues that are identified by stakeholders would need to be addressed during the select committee stages, which is likely to be more difficult than addressing them earlier . Changes made at that stage also carry a higher risk of implementation issues. Or • Issue an exposure draft before introduction and the commencement of the parliamentary stages : this option would provide an opportunity to test the policy direction and the Bill’s technical details, clarit y and usability with stakeholders before final decisions are made and a parliamentary process commences . 48. We recommend issuing an exposure draft as part of the legislative process. This would be consistent with the commitment in the National and ACT Parties’ Coalition Agreement to ensur e regulatory decisions are based on principles of good -law-making. Along with questions on the technical details of the exposure draft, the accompanying consultation document could include specific questions on alternative policy options for providing and paying leave entitlements to elicit stakeholder feedback before final decisions are made. Issuing an exposure draft would also provide the opportunity to test the implementation period required to enable robust implementation of changes to payroll and business systems. 49. While it may provide greater assurance that the Bill i s free of technical issues, this option would require more time. Once a draft Bill was complete to a standard that would support consultation, MBIE would need to develop and publish a consultation document. Before introduction , submissions would need to be analysed, advice provided to you on the feedback and any issues identified, solutions developed and incorporated in an introduction version o f the Bill. Next steps 50. We look forward to discussing the next steps for this work with you in more detail. We will then be in a position to provide more detailed advice on your chosen policy direction. Annexes Annex One: Summary of the Holidays Act Taskforce ’s recommendations Annex Two: The Taskforce’s objectives and parameters Annex Three: Financial implications and compliance costs
2324- 0982 In Confidence 12
2324- 0982 In Confidence 13 Annex O ne: Summary of the Holidays Act Taskforce recommendations The Holidays Act Taskforce recommendations include: • New methodologies, calculations and definitions , intended to provide prescription and clarity around how to accurately calculate entitlements and payments. These include: • New methods that employers must use to calculate the amount of the four week entitlement to annual holidays an employee uses when t hey take leave. This includes prescription around how to determine a week for the purpose o f annual leave entitlement. • New leave payment formulas and definitions to provide greater clarity about what payments must be included in the calculations. This includes clarifications to the definition of gross earnings. • New eligibility tests for f amily violence, bereavement and sick leave and a new ‘otherwise working day’ test for determining days on which these entitlements apply. • A new test for when an employee may receive their annual holiday entitlement on a ‘pay-as-you -go’ basis and clear rules for reviewing whether it can continue to be used throughout the course of employment. • Improvements in access to some leave entitlements, intended to ensure the balance of decision- making between employers and employees when it comes to requests for holidays and leave is appropriately calibrated. These include: • Ability for e mployees to take annual leave in advance of when the four week entitlement arises after each 12 months of employment on a pro- rata basis. • Access to sick, bereavement and family violence leave from the first day of employment for eligible employees and ability to take part days of sick and family violence leave. • Access to three days bereavement leave expanded to a wider number of family members, including ‘cultural family groups ’. • Some increases to minimum leave payments to address disadvantages currently experienced by some employees. These include: • The addition of a 13- week average pay calculation for comparison to the ordinary pay and 52 -week average calculations for annual leave payments so that employees (such as seasonal workers) are not disadvantaged by taking leave adjacent to a busy period. • Introduction of a requirement to pay the greater of ordinary and average pay for family violence, bereavement and sick leave and alternative and public holidays for all employees to resolve issues with the appl ication of the current methodology and potential for employer gaming. • Removal of the ‘override’ to the normal rules for annual holiday payments in the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act 1987 which disadvantages employees returning from parental leave who take annual holidays. • Improved transparency and clarity around some processes including: • Clearer requirements related to the process for having a closedown period.
2324- 0982 In Confidence 14 • What is permitted and required with regards treating employment as continuous for the purpose of leave entitlements when a business is sold or transferred. • A requirement to provide pay statements in every pay period to provide greater transparency about leave and pay for employees. • Additional/clarified record- keeping requirements to ensure employers have the data required to accurately complete the calculations and tests.
2324- 0982 In Confidence 15 Annex Two: The Holidays Act Taskforce ’s objectives and parameters Objectives
2324- 0982 In Confidence 2 You have options in the following areas about how to proceed with the Holidays Act Review: • The priority for this work : Progressing this work in your future work programme will require dedicated MBIE policy and legal resources and PCO drafting resource. • The policy direction in which to proceed : Options include proceeding with the Taskforce’s recommendations in full or considering alternative options that might go further to reduce complexity or minimise complianc e costs for example (and which may or may not align with the Taskforce’s recommendations ). • The steps in the legislative process: You could progress a Bill straight to introduction or issue an exposure draft first to test the policy direction and technical details. We recommend: • giving a high level of priority to completing work to reform the Holidays Act to resolve the longstanding issues and their ongoing impact s (consistent with the Coalition Government’s commitment to improve the quality of regulation); • exploring alternative options that maintain broad alignment with the Taskforce’s recommendations , but go further than what has been within scope for the policy design work to date ( nominated representatives of both BusinessNZ and the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions (NZCTU) have indicated a willingness to do this ); and • issuing an exposure draft of the Bill to gain wider stakeholder feedback on the policy direction and technical details before final policy decisions are made and the p arliamentary part of the process commences (consistent with National and ACT’s coalition agreement commitment to ensure regulatory decisions are based on the principles of g ood law - making) . We look forward to discussing the next steps for this work with you in more detail. We will then be able to provide more detailed advice on your chosen option. Recommended action The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment recommends that you: a Note that, as Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety , you are responsible for administering the Holidays Act 2003 (the Act) . Noted
2324- 0982 In Confidence 3
2324- 0982 In Confidence 4 Background to the Holidays Act 2003 and the impact of non-compliance 1. As Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety you are responsible for the Holidays Act 2003 (the Act). The purpose of the Act is to promote balance between work and other aspects of employees’ lives . It sets out an employee’s minimum entitlement s to annual holidays (in weeks) and public holidays , sick, bereavement and family violence leave (in days) , and the payments for them that employers are obliged to make. The Act also covers issues such as annual closedowns for businesses, transferring public holidays and ‘cashing up’ one week’s annual holiday. 2. The Act is one of the core foundations of the employment relations and employment standards (ERES) regulatory system, placing rights and obligations on every employer and employee. There is significant opportunity for improvements to the Act to ensure it is , and remains , fit-for-purpose in the context of modern and constantly evolving working arrangements and is responsive to business needs. This includes resolving tensions in the current balance between the core regulatory objectives for the ERES system of flexible regulatory design, worker protection and certainty for regulated parties . 3. In our Briefing to the Incoming Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety , we recommended that work to reform the Holidays Act be accorded a high level of priority in your future policy work programme [2023 1030 refers]. The Act was intended to accommodate increasingly diverse work patterns through flexible regulatory design… 4. The Act sought to address criticisms that the Holidays Act 1981 was complicated, difficult to understand and apply and, being predicated on a 40-hour Monday -to-Friday working week, did not reflect changes in working and pay patterns that had occurred in the interv ening years. 5. The Act retained the underlying leave entitlement system in the previous 1981 Act (based on weeks for annual holidays and days for other types of leave which are provided after specified periods of employment ) but was designed to accommodate diverse working and pay arrangements through flexible regulatory design. There are several areas in the Act where employers can adopt a range of approaches to meet their legal obligations , and/or where employers and employees must agree how entitlement s will be provided (such as determining what a week means for each individual employee) . 6. T he Act is based on two key principles relating to entitlements and pay . i. T hat entitlements are determined in relation to the work pattern at the time leave is taken. ii. T hat employees should not be financially disadvantaged by taking leave, that is, they should be paid (at least) what they would have earned had they worked. …but does not provide the certainty and clarity that employers and employees need 7. The Act’s largely principles -based approach to expressing the rules contrasts with a prescriptive, rules -based approach, which is strongly supported by many stakeholders (particularly employers and payroll providers). Rather than providing choices for calculating entitlemen ts, a rules -based approach would provide precise calculations and formulas that would give a single ‘correct’ answer as to what the minimum entitlement and pay is in all situations. 8. The principles -based approach is generally straightforward to apply when work and pay arrangements are consistent and predictable. T he flexible design of the Act ’s provisions is more difficult to apply when hours of work vary between weeks and days and when pay
2324- 0982 In Confidence 5 structures include variable components such as commission and allowances. In these cases, employers have to use their best judgement on how to apply the principles based on the specific facts of an employee’s working and remuneration arrangements , and a number of provisions require the agreement of employees each time leave is taken. 9. A number of the specific terms, calculations and processes included in the Act also lack clarity and have been a feature of a significant body of litigation related to the Act. 10. The result in practice is that: • employers lack certainty that the way they have calculated leave entitlements and pay meets their minimum obligations and employees have difficulty understanding whether they have received their statutory entitlements ; • the Act is difficult to implement in payr oll systems due to the number of circumstantial judgments and agreements required; • there are high compliance costs for employers, particularly those with large numbers of employees who have variable work and pay arrangement s; • issues related to the implementation of the Act are a significant driver of demand for employment support services. Systemic compliance issues with the Act have been well known since 2012 11. The challenges with applying the legislation, combined with payroll systems that are incapable of supporting compliance or not correctly configured by employers , and poor business processes (for e xample inaccurate record -keeping) , have contributed to widespread (often unintentional) non- compliance with the Act. 12. Systemic compliance issues with the Act first came to light in 2012 in a case involving BP Oil . MBIE’s engagement with key payroll providers and employers in 2014 indicated that problems with implementing the Act were likely to be widespread. A targeted review of the Act was proposed in 2015 based on attempting to resolve differences between employer and employee representatives but Cabinet decided not to proceed. The differences in opinion centred around the fact that some employees and employers were likely to be worse off if changes to the Act were implemented. 13. MBIE was asked to look for solutions within the current legislative framework and between 2015 and 2018 the Labour Inspectorate delivered a payroll strategy to address implementation issues. The programme of work focussed on remediation of historical underpayments, industry and sector engagement and better provision of information and education to employers and employees. While this has helped with implementation of the current Act and created greater awareness of what is required to comply, the extent of improvements has been constrained by the problems with the legislation and the difficulty of systematising entitlements and payments. 14. Many stakeholders remain unhappy with the current situation as the uncertainty about exactl y what is required to be compliant persists. In Simpson- Grierson’s 2023 pre -election survey 63 percent of employers selected Holidays Act simplification as their top priority for an incoming government to address, as was the result of the previous four pre -election surveys. The economic impact of Holidays Act issues is significant 15. The significant and widespread underpayment of employee leave entitlements has result ed in large- scale remediation payments across both the public and private sectors, running i nto billions of dollars. As of June 2020 (when funding for the dedicated Labour Inspectorate
2324- 0982 In Confidence 6 payroll audit and investigations team ceased)1, 112 New Zealand employers (who had at least 20 employees and an electronic pay system) had made remediation payments to a total of 227,300 employees, amounting to a sum of $237.7 million2. Over 95 percent of employers assessed by the Labour Inspectorate were found to be non- compliant , and in different organisations arrears have ranged from an average of $29 to $8 ,000 per affected employee. 16. This figure does not include remediation payments due to health and school sector employees , New Zealand’s two largest payrolls. • In April 2023 Te Whatu Ora Health New Zealand estimated 270,000 current and former employees were owed a combined total in the vicinity of $2.235 billion. Te Whatu Ora’s remediation project is expected to be completed in 2024/2025. • The Ministry of Education (MoE) is undertaking Holidays Act remediation on behalf of 2,500 schools and for around 200,000 current and former employees across 400,000 roles. MoE made its first remediation payment of $38.5 m illion to 83,000 school employees in June 2023, focused on payments for sick leave, public holidays, bereavement leave and family violence l eave. Further remediation payments are in progress and total l iability is estimated at around $500 m illion. This figure excludes payments for annual holidays for teachers , for which the remediation amount is yet to be determined. 17. Enquiries related to the Holidays Act drive demand for employment support and dispute resolution services in the ERES system: • Between July 2019 and February 2023, the proportion of monthly calls related to leave and holidays received by the MBIE Service Centre employment line each month ranged from approximately 15 percent to 37 percent. Enquir ies tend to spike during public holiday periods such as Christmas/New Year and Easter. • Since 1 July 2018, the proportion of complaints received each year by the Labour Inspectorate involving holidays and leave issues has ranged from 36 to 59 percent. A greater proportion of investigations have involved Holidays Act issues (8 0 percent in 2022/ 2023 ). • A study of 2021 Citizens Advice Bureau enquiries found employment was the second largest area for which people sought help. About 55 percent of employment enquiries related to “employment conditions”, of which half were about pay and leave issues. • Community Law Centres reported holiday pay enquiries compris e around four percent of their work in the 2022/ 2023 year. Work commenced in 2018 to address the issues with the Act A tripartite taskforce was established to suggest improvements to the Act 18. In May 2018 , following a joint request from BusinessNZ and the NZCTU, Cabinet agreed to establish a tripartite Holidays Act Taskforce (the Taskforce) comprised of government, business, and union representatives to suggest improvements to the Act [CAB -18-M IN- 0250]. The Taskforce’s objectives and parameters are included in Annex Two.
2324- 0982 In Confidence 7 19. The Taskforce was provided scope to design a system for providing and paying leave entitlements that could be fundamentally different from the current system ( where weeks and days of leave entitlement arise after specified periods of employment ). It was also required to preserve current levels of entitlement and the intent of the principles set out in paragraph 6 as far as possible. In addition to considering options to improve the provision of, and payment for , entitlements , the Taskforce’s parameters extended to considering any other matters related to the Act that it saw fit. 20. The Taskforce undertook its review in three distinct phases: i. Understanding the issues wi th the Act. This included publishing an issues paper to seek input from businesses, payroll practitioners and providers, employee representatives and individuals. ii. Developing and testing options to address the issues identified . The testing was conducted by an external provider with expertise in payroll matters and using bona fide payroll data across a wide range of working arrangements. iii. Confirming preferred options and finalising recommendations. This involved assessing the options developed by the Taskforce against a range of criteria, consulting with a select group of payroll providers, and confirming the final recommendations in a report p rovided to the Government in October 2019 . Cabinet agreed to endorse the Taskforce ’s 22 recommendations in full 21. The Taskforce reached agreement on an improved status quo model for calculating leave entitlements and pay, where entitlements continue to be provided after specified periods of employment and the existing units of entitlement are retained (in weeks for annual leave and days for other types of leave) . The recommendations address a wide range of issues that were identified through the first phase of the review and can be grouped in four areas as follows : i. Prescriptive methodologies , calculations and definitions to address the current lack of certainty about how to calculate and pay leave entitlements . ii. Improved access to some leave entitlements, to address issues identified by some stakeholders related to the 12 month (annual leave) and 6 month (other forms of leave) waiting periods for employees to be able to take leave . iii. Some increases to minimum leave payments for some employees, to address financial disadvantages some employees may experience when they take leave. iv. Improved transparency and clarity around some processes to ensure employees are able understand their leave entitlements and pay. The recommendations are summarised in more detai l in Annex One. 22. In March 2020, Cabinet endorsed the Taskforce’s 22 recommendations in full, as the basis for a substantially amended Holidays Act [CAB -20-MIN-0100]. The Government announced this decision in February 2021 (following a delay due to Covid- 19). MBIE has completed a detailed policy design process with a range of stakeholders 23. When Cabinet endorsed the Taskforce’s recommendations, it noted that the complexity of the existing legislation and the proposed amendments to it meant further detailed policy design work would be required to implement them in legislation. 24. MBIE completed the detailed policy design work during 2021 – 2022. To support this process MBIE brought together a working group of stakeholders that included payroll system
2324- 0982 In Confidence 9 Policy direction 34. You have options in terms of how to proceed in relation to the policy settings . There are several considerations for you in deciding on the direction in which you wish to proceed which are discussed in more detail below. In summary , the options include: a. Proceed with existing Taskforce's recommendations: This would involve completing the Bill based on the existing recommendations . While still requiring significant work before introduction , this option would deliver the fastest progress . It would not, however, provide opportunity to consider improvements that might lead to better long- term outcome s. b. Explore alternatives that align with the Taskforce’s recommendations: Under this option, we would c onsider alternative options for reduc ing complexity or minimis ing compliance costs (for example) , while broadly aligning with the recommendations and retaining the underlying entitlements model . Examples include considering a weeks -based accrual system for annual leave; consolidating some of the payment methodologies and simplifying t he new framework for using ‘pay-as-you-go’ for annual leave . c. Explore alternatives outside the Taskforce’s recommendations: This option would consider alternative s to the recommendations that represent a fundamentally different model for providing and paying leave entitlements (such as an hours -based entitlement accrual system for annual leave). This option would allow for new solutions to address issues. However, i t is likely to be comple x, would take the most time to progress , and tripartite consensus may be challenging. 35. We recommend exploring option b as a first step, while ensuring there are opportunities to test other options with stakeholders (including option c), for example through an exposure draft consultation on the Bill (discussed further below). There are opportunities to simplify the recommendations and reduce compliance costs for employers 36. Cabinet set eight objectives for the Taskforce in its Terms of Reference (Annex Two). The Taskforce focussed particularly on providing greater clarity and certainty through the provision of detailed processes and prescriptive methodologies and on protecting employee entitlements . It focussed less on others , such as simplifying the Act and minimising compliance costs for employers . 37. The prescriptive methodologies and detailed processes the Taskforce recommended will add more certainty to the regulatory environment but also result in an inevitable amount of complexity . The policy design and drafting process has further highlighted the extent of the complexity and the challenges of implementing the recommendations in a way that provides clarity and is easy to understand and use for all sta keholders. While providing more certainty, there is a risk that the level of complexity in the draft Bill will present future implementation and compliance challenges for employers. 38. The balance struck between objectives is likely to be a contentious aspect of the Bill. During the Taskforce’s consultation processes, many stakeholders (particularly employers and payroll providers) raised concerns about the level of complexity and therefore the extent to which the proposals would address the underlying issues the Act poses . This has continued to be a theme through the design process .
2324- 2225 1 ANNEX FOUR: AMENDMENTS TO PARENTAL LEAVE AND EMPLOYMENT RELATIONS LEGISLATION Overview of the paper 1. This paper seeks your agreement to include amendments to parental leave and employment relations legislation in your May Cabinet paper. The proposals are intended to reflect current practice to reduc e rates of non- compliance. 2. The Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act 1987 (PLEPA) relies on the existing Holidays Act 2003 (Holidays Act) definition of “ordinary weekly pay” (OWP) to calculate parental leave payments. We recommend disconnecting the PLEPA from the Holidays Act instead of using the replacement for OWP in the Employment (Leave Entitlements) Bill (the Bill). We propose a standalone methodology which reflects the intent of current methodology but is more compatible with Inland Revenue (IR) systems . 3. Ther e is a lack of legislative clarity regarding the treatment of leave entitlements for some employees in restructuring situations. As a result, common practice among employers does not align with requirements in the Holidays Act. We are proposing a flexible approach for those employees, enabling treatment of entitlements to be negotiated by the incoming and outgoing employ ers rather than requiring them to paid out in accordance with the Holidays Act. Recommendations Area Recommendation Decision Methodology for determining parental leave payments Note that a consequential amendment to the methodology for calculating parental leave payment rates in the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act 1987 (PLEPA) is required because it uses the Holidays Act 2003 ‘ordinary weekly pay’ (OWP) calculation which is replaced in the Employment (Leave Entitlements) Bill and that this also presents an opportunity to better support the objectives of IR’s online application system to make applications faster and easier for applicants and employers. Noted Agree that your May Cabinet paper seeks agreement to replace the reference to OWP in the PLEPA with a standalone formula that is aligned with the methodology IR uses for the calculated income estimate of OWP and the average weekly income calculation set out in S71CAA of the PLEPA. Agree Discuss Note that the proposed formula would use a four -week average of an applicant’s gross weekly taxable earnings before parental leave payments start, and that we are continuing to work with IR on the details for the timing of the calculation which we will include in your May Cabinet paper. Noted Treatment of leave entitlements in a restructuring situation Note that, in March 2020, Cabinet agreed to the Holidays Act Taskforce’s recommendation that “on the sale and transfer of a business, employees should have a choice about whether to transfer all of their leave entitlements or have them paid out and reset”. Noted Note policy work on this recommendation has revealed that giving effect to the recommendation would impose a statutory constraint on the contractual arrangements businesses make during the sale and transfer of a business, which could discourage incoming Noted 2324- 2225 2 employ ers from offering employees the option to transfer their employment. Agree that your May Cabinet paper seek agreement to provide that: • for employees not specified in Schedule 1A of the Employment Relations Act 2000 (E RA): o specified matters relating to the treatment of leave entitlements in restructuring situations must be included in employees’ Employee Protection Provisions as matters employers will negotiate if they have negotiated for the employee to transfer their employment and the empl oyee has chosen to do so, including:  whether the incoming employer will recognise all or part of the employee’s annual leave and alternative holiday entitlements not taken at the date of transfer or the outgoing employer will pay them out, and whether the employee will be given a choice about this (full details set out in option five of Appendi x One) ,  how liability will be apportioned between the employers in relation to what has been negotiated regarding the matter above, and  how employee information needed in relation to what has been negoti ated regarding the matter above will be provided to the incoming employer o the payment rate for transferred leave entitlements must not be less than what it would have been had it been paid out at the time of transfer • for employees specified in Schedule 1A of the ERA, the status quo related to the treatment of leave entitlements in restructuring situations remains unchanged. Agree Discuss We recommend a consequential change to the Parental Leave payment methodology The replacement of Ordinary Weekly Pay in the Holidays Act means a consequential amendment to the methodology for determining Parental Leave payments is required 4. The E mployment (Leave Entitlements) Bill ( the Bill) replaces the ‘ordinary weekly pay’ (OWP) c alculation that is part of the Holidays Act 2003 (Holidays Act) methodology for calculating annual holiday payments, with a new ‘ordinary weekly leave pay’ (OWLP) calculation. This change is intended to provide better certainty for employers. 5. D uring drafting, it was identified that replacing OWP with OWLP meant a consequential amendment would be required to the methodology in the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act 1987 (PLEPA) for determining the rate of parental leave (PL) payment payable to an eligible employee. 6. Currently, the PL payment rate method set out in the PLEPA is the greater of the employee’ s OWP just before the commencement of parental leave payments or their ‘average weekly income’ (AWI), up to a maximum weekly amount of $712.17. The policy intent of including OWP is to reflect what an employee would have earned at the time payments start. The intent of AWI is to reflect earnings over a longer period (the AWI 2324- 2225 3 calculation is set out in the PLEPA and is the weekly average of the employee’s gross taxable earnings in 26 of the last 52 weeks in which those earnings were highest). We’ve developed options for the amendment and recommend disconnecting the PL payment methodology from the Bill 7. During the election period, we worked with Inland Revenue (IR), the agency responsiblefor processing parental leave applications and making PL payments, to develop options for the consequential amendment to OWP. We aimed to retain the policy intent of the OWP and AWI comparison. 8. The two main options considered were to replace OWP with: a. Option 1: A reference to the new OWLP calculation in the Bill. b. Option 2: A standalone formula in the PLEPA which would disconnect the PL payment method from the Bill. Option two provides an opportunity to remove a remaining pain point in IR’s online PPL application system 9. MBIE and IR recommend option 2 as it supports the objectives of IR’s online paid parental leave (PPL) application system which was rolled out in 2021 1. The objectives were to make PPL applications faster and easier for applicants, reduce compliance costsfor employers, and simplify processing for IR. 10. The online PPL application system includes a calculated income estimate (based on the employee’s income information held by IR), inten ded to remov e the responsibility for making the complex payment calculations from applicant s and employers (which had been identified as one of the most significant pain points in the PPL application process). 11. The calculated income estimate is limited however, as it has not removed this burden from all applicants and employers because IR does not have access to the level of detailabout an employee’s pay that is required to calculate OWP in accordance with theHolidays Act 2. Instead, it estimates OWP using a formula based on a four- week average of total gross taxable earnings. This impacts applicants who receive less than the maximum PL payment rate (10.8 per cent in the 2022/2023 financial year). 12. To avoid delays in the deployment of the online system when it was rolled out, resolving the issue was not prioritised. Currently IR has a notification to inform applicants that itmay not have all the necessary information to calculate payment rates correctly. These applicants are given instructions about how they and/or their employers can manually check the calculations. They can update IR’s figure if they determine that the payment rate that they are legally entitled to is different than the IR estimate. Just before PL payments are due to start, IR also sends a reminder to applicants who apply early to 1 Prior to 2021, regulations required PPL applicants to fill in a form and verify supporting information through statutory declarations. In IR’s research, parents identified this administrative process as a major pain point. IR holds most of the information applicants were asked to provide and verify, meaning much of the administrative burden was unnecessary. In 2021 IR integrated the PPL application process into its new tax system. After determining eligibility for PPL through SmartStart (a single joint agency online platform for services associated with the birth of a child) applicants are directed to their secur e myIR account to complete and lodge the application (which includes the PL payment rate calculation). 2 IR receives information about employee’s gross taxable earnings and deductions each payday, but it does not have visibility o f the payment types that make up the gross taxable amount. It cannot distinguish the components of OWP an employer is able to such as salary/wages, allowances and regular productivity and overtime payments. 2324- 2225 4 confirm all the application details are still correct and up to date, including the income estimate. 13. Like OWP, the new OWLP calculation in the Bill requires information about the components of an employee’s pay that IR does not have access to. Option One would therefore still require manual checking of estimated calculations for all applicants and employers. We propose a standalone formula in the PLEPA that is aligned with the methodology IR currently uses to estimate income 14. MBIE and IR propose replacin g the reference to OWP in the PLEPA with a standalone formula that is aligned with the methodology IR use for the calculated income estimate of OWP in the online application system and with the methodology for the AWI calculation specified in the PLEPA. The proposed formula would use a four -week average of an applicant’s gross weekly taxable earnings before parental leave payments start. We are continuing to work with IR on the precise details for the timing of the calculation to ensure workability and will finalise this for inclusion in your May Cabinet paper. 15. We have assessed the proposal against the criteria of practicality, payment outcomes for PPL applicants and costs to government. Practicality 16. The proposed formula uses information IR holds and woul d therefore mean that, for most applicants 3, the income estimate calculated through the online application system would be accurate. 17. Aligned with the objective of the including the calculated income estimate in the PPL application system, most applicants or their employers would therefore no longer need to run manual calculations to check the pre- populated figure , further reducing the compliance costs and administrative burden of PPL applications . Payment outcomes for applicants 18. The majority of applicants will be unaffected as their OWP and/or AWI are above the maximum payment rate (89 per cent in the 2022/2023 financial year, 32,587 of 36,544 applicants). For applicants whose OWP and/or AWI are less than or close to the maximum rate (10.8 per cent in the 2022/2023 financial year or 3,957 of 36,544 applicants) the impact on their payment rate will be situation dependent. For applicants who do not have variable components of pay and work consistent hours each week, the outcome of the proposed four- week average formula will be very close to the legal status quo for OWP. 19. In other cases, because the proposed formula is based on gross taxable earnings which includes more payment types than OWP (eg. one-o ff bonuses and commission payments that are not a regular part of pay), it might produce a slightly higher payment rate compared to the legal status quo .
2324- 2225 1 ANNEX THREE: PROVIDING, TAKING AND PAYING OTHER LEAVE TYPES Overview of the paper 1. This paper seeks your decisions on adjustments to some of the 2020 Cabinet policy decisions for changes to family violence leave, bereavement leave, alternative and public holidays, and sick (FBAPS) leave. The proposals are intended to reduce complexity and compliance costs associated with these leave entitlements and payment calculations. They all remain aligned with the underlying intent of the Taskforce recommendations. 2. There are three FBAPS proposals covered in this paper: • Part 1: Consolidation of FBAPS payment methodologies • Part 2: Calculation of hours to be assigned on day of FBAPS leave • Part 3: Refinement of sick leave criteria and set period for accumulation of entitlement s. Recommendations Area Recommendation Decision Consolidation of FBAPS payment methodology Note that, under the Act , FBAPS leave payments are based on an employee’s relevant daily pay (RDP) or, if it is not possible to determine RDP or an employee’s daily pay varies in the pay period, an employer may use average daily pay (AD P) which , in some circumstances, requires the employer to make a judgement about which to use. Noted Note the Taskforce recommendation requires the comparison of two calculations for all employees (ordinary daily leave pay and a new hours based average daily pay) to remove the need for judgement , reduce risks of gaming and ensure FBAPS payments reflect what an employee would have earned on a specific day . Noted Note that initial feedback suggests the new calculations are still complex and burdensome and that the new formulas could inflate FBAPS payments above what an employee would normally earn on a day in some circumstances . Noted Agree to a revised relevant daily pay calculation which is a single calculation for FBAPS leave payments involving: base pay and fixed allowances (that will not oth erwise be paid during the period of leave) and an average of productivity and incentive payments received. Agre e Discuss Note that we will continue to work on the exact detail of the revised RDP methodology to ensure that the calculation is clear and functional and will include this in your May Cabinet paper . Noted Note the exposure draft can to test the views of stakeholders , including those of payroll providers , on the ease of application . Noted Calculation of hours to be assigned on day of FBAPS leave Note that the Taskforce recommended, and Cabinet agreed to a new calendar day methodology for situations when employees do not have clear daily hours of work to determine the number of hours an employee would have worked on a day of annual or FBAPS leave. Noted
2324- 2225 1 ANNEX TWO: PROVIDING, TAKING AND PAYING ANNUAL LEAVE Overview of the paper 1. This paper seeks your decisions on adjust ments to some of the 2020 Cabinet decisions on changes to the annual leave (AL)1 provisions in the Holidays Act 2003 (the Act) . The proposals are intended to reduce complexity and compliance costs and to more closely reflect common practice and understanding of AL entitlements while maintaining alignment with the underlying weeks -based entitlement system . 2. The paper also provides an initial overview of some other areas where opportunity remain s within a week s-based entitlement system to make further technical improvements or policy adjustments. Finally, the paper provides an initial overview of considerations around an alternative hours -based accrual entitlement system . As discussed with you, we can include targeted questions on these areas in the exposure draft consultation document . Recommendations Area Recommendation Decision AL entitlement framework Note that in 2020, Cabinet agreed that employees should continue to become entitled to four weeks’ AL after 12 months continuous employment but that an employer must not unreasonably withhold consent to an employee’s request to take AL in advance of entitlement arising on a pro- rata basis and that this would add complexity and not support common practice. Noted Agree that, rather than retain the rule that four weeks AL entitlement arises as a single amount after 12 months continuous employment, a weeks -based accrual system be adopted with AL entitlement continuously accruing. Agree Discuss Parameters to support a weeks- based accrual system Agree that AL entitlement accrues at a rate of not less than 0.0768 weeks per week of employment. Agree Discuss Agree that the weeks of employment that AL accrues during aligns with the weeks that are included and excluded from ’12 months of continuous employment’ under the Act. Agree Discuss Agree to the following formula to provide clarity about the amount of AL that would accrue during a part week of unpaid leave (when AL does not accrue): Number of hours that the employee did work in the week unpaid leave was taken (up to the value of the denominator), divided by the employee’s average number of guaranteed hours per seven- day period, multiplied by 0.0768. Agree Discuss Agree that, aligned with the status quo, when it is agreed that AL entitlement will accrue during unpaid leave beyond the first week, the Average Weekly Earnings divisor must be reduced by that number of weeks. Agree Discuss
2324- 2225 10 The previous Minister agreed to change the accumulation process for sick leave to reflect the increase in sick leave entitlement from five to ten days 44. In July 2021, the previous Government increased the minimum sick leave entitlement from five to ten days per year. In November 2021, the previous Minister considered how to adjust the accumulation process to reflect the increased entitlement. He agreed that employees who were eligible from their first day of employment would be entitled to two days of sick leave on their first day of employment, an additional two days after one and two months of employment, and an additional four days after three months of employment, so the ten days of minimum sick leave entitlement was reached after three months (2,2,2,4).
2324- 2225 10 We recommend simplifying the framework for paying AL as a regular part of an employee’s pay ( pay-as -you -go) 33. The Act provides that some employees may be paid for their AL as part of their regular pay (pay-as-you-go (PAYG) ) instead of being provided with four weeks’ AL entitlement each year if: • the employee is on a genuine fixed- term agreement of less than 12 months, or • the employee works so intermittently or irregularly that it is impractical for the employer to provide them with four weeks’ AL. 34. In both of these situations: • the employee must agree to it in their employment agreement and • the AL pay must be no less than eight percent of their gross earnings in the pay period. 35. There are several areas of the current framework that are problematic in practice . Employers must exercise a high degree of discretion to make the assessment of whether an employee works on a basis that is so ‘intermittent or irregular’ that it is ‘impractical’ to provide four weeks AL as time off work . If PAYG is agreed, the framework for review ing its use during employment and stopping it if the criteria no longer apply is also not clear . The lack of clarity has contributed to non- compliance. 36. To address these issues, in 2020 Cabinet accepted the Taskforce’s recommendations for improving clarity and certainty around when PAYG can be used and a clear set of parameters to support its use. These included a new four -part test of an ‘interment and irregular’ working pattern and a recurring 13-week review period to determine if the definition continues to be met. The recommended approach lacks clarity and adds administrative burden 37. The recommended test lacked clarity in several areas and still required a high degree of judgement. Amongst other things, i t required an employer to make expectation- based assessments a bout work patterns before the start of employment and to make a subjective assessment at each review about whether an employee had an ‘underlying pattern of work’ in the previous 13 weeks (defined as an assessment that time at work had not repeated in a manner possible to anticipate) . 38. The previous Minister agreed to a refined version of the criteria for using PAYG that made clear PAYG may be used from the start of employment if the employee does not have agreed hours of work in their employment agreement and there is no expect ation that it would need to stop after the first 13 -week review. An objective test for the 13-week review was also agreed . 11 The previous Minister also agreed to clarifications and additions to the recommended framework for the 13-week review process to address ambiguities, gaps and improve workability. 39. The refined test and framework reflected tripartite agreement that the proposals aligned with the underlying intent of the recommendation, including the intent to increase the
2324- 2225 11 fairness of the requirement to provide the full ten- day minimum sick leave entitlement to employees who work less than five days a week. A number proposed a pro -rata approach to sick leave for part -time employees . You have received correspondence from a number of stakeholders who have raised similar concerns and suggestions . 53. To provide an opportunity to seek stakeholder feedback, we can include some options for addressing the issues raised in the exposure draft consultation on this mat ter if you wish.
2324- 2225 12 Appendix 1 – Hypothetical examples of FPABS calculations (for illustrative purposes only and with judgement exercised as to how methodologies would apply) 1. Marcus has 30 guaranteed hours per week but no agreed days or times of work. A normal shift is 8 hours and might be during the day or at night. His agreed pay is $27 for ordinary hours, but $35 for overtime and weekend work. Currently, he receives an enduring higher duties allowance of $80 per week as acting supervisor. He is also paid a night shift allowance of $35 and receives an incentive payment of $25 if he meets his targets for a shift. He receives a quarterly retention bonus of $500. Scenario 1 2. A public holiday falls on an otherwise working day (OWD) for Marcus. He is not rostered to work and so is entitled to a paid 8.5 -hour day without work (calculated based on 13- week average). a. Holidays Act RDP = Judgement required, but arguably c annot be calculated as Marcus had no rostered hours. b. Holidays Act ADP = $298.25 – Calcu lated as daily rate based on average gross earnings (including enduring allowances). c. Taskforce ODLP = $233.5 – Calculated as 8 hours at a rate of $27 plus 0.5 hours overtime at a rate of $35. d. Taskforce hourly ADP = $279.57 – Calculated as average of gross earnings, excluding higher duties allowance which is enduring. e. Revised RDP = $252.62 – Calculated as 8 hours at a rate of $27 per hour plus 0.5 hours overtime at a rate of $35 per hour (the same as ODLP) plus 8.5 hours at a rate of $2.25 per hour to refl ect average incentive payments based on a 13- week average. Scenario 2 3. Marcus notifies his employer he is sick before he starts a rostered 10 -hour night shift. a. Holidays Act RDP = $346.00 – Calculated as 8 hours at a rate of $27 plus 2 hours overtime at a rate of $35 plus fixed night shift allowance of $35 and likely incentive allowance of $25. b. Holidays Act ADP = $298.25 – Calculated as daily rate based on average gross earnings (including enduring allowances). c. Taskforce ODLP = $321.00 – Calculated as 8 hours at a rate of $27 plus 2 hours overtime at a rate of $35 plus a full night rate allowance of $35. d. Taskforce hourly ADP = $328.90 – Calculated as 10 hours at a rate of the hourly average of gross earnings ($32.89), excluding higher duties allowance which is enduring. e. Revised RDP = $343.53 – Calculated as 8 hours at a rate of $27 per hour plus 2 hours overtime at a rate of $35 per hour plus a full night rate allowance of $35 (the same as ODLP). RDP also includes 10 hours at a rate of $2.25 per hour to reflect average incentive payments based on a 13- week average.
2324- 2225 2 Note concerns were raised by stakeholders, particularly payroll practitioners, about the complexity of the calendar day methodology and the extent and cost of system changes it would require. Noted Note that, in response, the previous Minister agreed to remove the calendar day aspect of the methodology for annual leave and allowed parties to reach a formal agreement not to use the default calendar day methodology for FBAPS leave. Noted Note the removal of the calendar day methodology for FBAPS leave means that assigned hours would instead be based on an employee’s average hours across all days worked in the pay periods that started in the 13 weeks before the one in which the leave is taken. Noted Note there will be some scenarios where employees are paid for fewer hours than they regularly work on a particular day as a result of this change in calculation but we believe these situations are limited and outweighed by the significant information collection, storage and processing costs of the calendar day methodology . Noted Agree to include in your Cabinet paper a proposal to remove the calendar day methodology for both annual leave and FBAPS leave . Agree Discuss Refinement of FBS (family violence, bereavement and sick) leave criteria Note Cabinet agreed that for eligible employees become entitled to FBS leave from their first day of employment (removing the current six-month waiting period) and that other employees would become eligible if they met prescribed tests after three or six months of employment. Noted Note that the current FBS eligibility criteria (worked an average of 10 hours per week, and at least one hour in every week or 40 hours in every month) does not align with entitlement from day one. Noted Note that, to support access to FBS entitlements from the first day of employment Cabinet also agreed to new eligibility tests and that the previous Minister agreed to clarifications to these, including a criteria for eligibility from the first day of employment that requires a judgement about whether the employer expects the employee to meet the ‘hours test” which will create uncertainty and potential for disagreement . Noted Note the removal of the expectations -based assessment that occurs on the first day of employment will mean that only employees with agreed hours in their employment agreement are eligible to FBS leave from their first day of employment, and all other employees are subject to the eligibility tests after three months of employment. Noted Agree to include in your Cabinet paper a proposal to remove the expectations -based assessment in the eligibility criteria for FBS leave. Agree Discuss Refinement of sick leave accumulation profile Note that Cabinet agreed that employees should be able to access their full entitlement of family violence and bereavement leave from day one but that sick leave entitlement should build up from day one so that an eligible employee can access the full allocation (five days at the time of decision) after four mont hs. Noted Note the previous Minister agreed to change the accumulation profile for sick leave to reflect the increase in sick leave entitlement from five to ten days so that, for employees eligible from day one, 10 days would accumulate over the first three months of Noted
2324- 2225 3 employment and other employees would get their full 10 day entitlement when they become eligible after three months. Note you have the option of proceeding with the previous Minister’s decision on the accumulation profile or considering one with a longer timeframe. Noted Agree to an accumulation profile for 10 days sick leave: EITHER • Option 1: Proceed with the previous Minister’s decision; OR • Option 2: Use a longer timeframe of six months: two days on day one, a further four days after three months and a further four days (i.e. the full entitlement) after six months. Agree
2324- 2225 5 9. The methodology would include the components of the current Holidays Act RDP but would provide a formula that makes it clear and possible to calculate the variable components (eg. commission and overtime) in every case. In situations where RDP is currently straightforward to calculate, the aim is that there would be little change from how FBAPS payments are currently calculated. The consolidated calculation is designed to be applicable to both waged and salaried workers. 10. The consolidated calculation would be comprised of four parts : A base rate for wages or salary plus fixed allowances plus an average of productivity or incentive payments received plus the cash value of board and lodgings. Base rate 11. Waged employees: Wages payable under the employee’s employment agreement at the time leave is taken for each of the hours it has been determined the employee would have worked on the relevant day if they had not been on FBAPS leave. If overtime or penal rates would have applied to any of those hours, then those rates must be used for the relevant hours. 12. Salaried employees: Employee must continue to be paid the salary payable under their employment agreement for the day as if they had not been on FBAPS leave. Employees must also receive any additional wages payable under their employment agreement for any additional hours the employee would have worked on the day in question that are not compensated by salary. Fixed allowances 13. Fixed allowances are an allowance of a non- variable amount that an employer would always be required by the employee’s employment agreement to pay if t he employee had worked the hours it has been determined they will be on FBAPS leave. This includes allowances such as fortnightly and daily allowances, a shift allowance or events -based allowance (such as a forklift driving allowance) that would always be payable under the employment agreement for those hours. 14. Fixed allowances would not have to be included if they are ‘enduring’ (will continue to be paid in full despite the employee being on leave, for example a fortnightly higher duties allowance) Produc tivity or incentive -based payments (including commission) 15. The value to be included would be calculated as follows: productivity and incentive -based payments (including commission) received in pay periods that started in the 13 weeks before the one in which the day of FBAPS leave is taken, divided by the number of hours the employee has worked or been on paid leave in those pay periods, multiplied by the hours it has been determined would have been worked on the relevant day. 16. Cabinet has agreed that, if the payments were earned over a period longer than 13 weeks , or do not relate to a specific period of time , they do not have to be included (eg. an annual bonus or incentive payment or long service or sign on bonus). This would apply to the calculation. Cash value of Board and Lodgings 17. For the exposure draft , this would be determined according to the current definition in the Act. Stakeholders have noted that the current definition lacks clarity about how it applies in various circumstances and can lead to ‘double dipping’ in cases where an employee continues to use board and lodgings during a period of leave. W e will include targeted questions about how it could be clarified and modernised in the exposure draft consultation document.
2324- 2225 6 We think the revised RDP would result in fair outcomes for employees and employers 18. We think that the consolidated calculation will, overall, provide a fair outcome for both employers and employees. Appendix 1 includes some initial, hypothetical scenarios we have developed to illustrate how the calculation will apply and how the payment outcomes might compare to the status quo and to the ‘greater of’ methodology agreed by Cabinet in 2020. 19. There is no solution that will produce a payment outcome that reflects precisely what an employee would have earned on a specific day in all situations. We have therefore aimed for a methodology to test in the exposure draft that we think will produce an outcome that reflects , to the greatest extent possible, what an employee would have expected to receive on any given day. In some cases, this might mean that payments are lower than they would currently be under the status quo (due to the possible inflation of payments above what would have been earned using the current ADP calculation in some cases), but not lower than what the employee would have reasonably expected to receive on the day had they worked. Part 2: Determining hours an employee would have worked on a day of leave Cabinet agreed to a new calendar day methodology to assign hours to a day of leave 20. In 2020, Cabinet agreed to the new methodologies recommended by the Holidays Act Taskforce for FBAPS and annual leave (AL) to provide clarity about how to determin e the portion of their entitlement an employee is using for a period of time off work. A key part of these methodologies is determining the number of hours an employee would have worked on a day of leave. 21. For employees who do not have specified daily hours of work , Cabinet agreed that for both AL and FBAPS leave, the calculation of the number of hours an employee would have worked would be based on the average number of hours that an employee has actually worked on the same day of the week over a 13- week period (the calendar day methodology ). Using this methodology, if an employee took leave on a Monday, their employer would calculate the total hours they worked on each Monday over the previous 13 weeks, and divide the total hours by the number of Mondays they had worked in the previous 13 weeks. Implementing the calendar day methodology would require extensive and costly system changes 22. The calendar day methodology has been one of the key areas of concern raised by stakeholders (particularly payroll providers) throughout the 2021- 2022 policy design process. These concerns c entre on the extent and cost of the payroll system changes that would be needed to implement the methodology, as payroll systems would be required to access and store data about daily hours of work and leave. Payroll providers have indicated that most payroll systems, particularly those used by small businesses, are currently only configured to store total hours for a pay period rather than a breakdown of daily hours of work and leave. 23. The methodology would also require employers to make numerous calculations when a period of leave is more than one calendar day, as a different calculation would need to be made for each calendar day of leave in a pay period. The previous Minister agreed to remove the ‘calendar day’ aspect of the methodology for annual leave and provide greater flexibility for FBAPS leave 24. Before the 2023 General Election, the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety agreed to simplify the methodology for determining the hours an employee would have worked on the day of annual leave by removing the ‘calendar day’ aspect of the methodology. In accordance
2324- 2225 8 day methodology would therefore only be used if the employee notified their employer of their intent to take leave before the roster was created (for example, if the employee has a scheduled medical procedure). 33. We consider the benefits to employers of removing the ‘calendar day’ aspect of the methodology for calculating the hours to assign to a day of FBAPS leave outweigh the disadvantages doing so may have for some employees in some scenarios. Part 3: FBS leave eligibility criteria and accumulation of sick leave entitlement Eligible employees currently become entitled to FBS leave after six months of employment 34. Currently under the Act, employees become entitled to family violence leave, bereavement leave and sick leave (FBS leave) if they meet the following eligibility criteria: a. they have completed six months of current continuous employment with the same employer, or b. they have worked for the employer for six months for an average of 10 hours per week, and at least one hour in every week or 40 hours in every month. 35. An employer may choose to allow an eligible employee to take FBS leave in advance before they have reached six months of employment, but there is no obligation for them to do so. Cabinet agreed for eligible employees to become entitled to FBS leave from their first day of employment 36. In 2020, Cabinet accepted the Holidays Act Taskforce’s (the Taskforce’s ) recommendation that eligible employees begin to accumulate the minimum sick leave entitlement, and become entitled to the full minimum family violence leave and bereavement leave entitlements, from their first day of employment. At that time, the minimum sick leave entitlement was five days per year. The recommended accumulation process was for eligible employees to become entitled to one day of sick leave on their first day of employment, and an additional day aft er every month of employment until the five days of minimum sick leave entitlement was reached after four months (1,1,1,1,1). 37. The intention behind the recommendation was to recognise that employees have little control over when they may need to take FBS leave and may therefore need to take it during their first six months of employment. It was also to recognise that not having access to FBS leave from the first day of employment may encourage employees to go to work sick, which raises health and safety concerns and is not in line with the key principle of the legislation to promote balance between work and other aspects of employees’ lives. Cabinet agreed to a new eligibility criteria for FBS leave 38. The current criteria in the Act to determine employees’ eligibility for FBS leave (worked for the employer for six months for an average of 10 hours per week, and at least one hour in every week or 40 hours in every month), is based on eligible employees becoming entitled to FBS leave after six months of employment. Such eligibility criteria do not align with the recommendation that eligible employees begin to accumulate FBS leave from their first day of employment.
2324- 2225 9 39. The Taskforce recommended a new criteria to determine employees’ eligibility for FBS leave from their first day of employment, which Cabinet accepted in 2020. The new eligibility criteria included the following tests at various points of employment: a. First day of employment: Does the employee have agreed hours and an expectation of continuous employment (an expectation that the employee will not have any periods of unpaid leave that are longer than one week)? b. After 13 weeks of employment: Does the employee meet the ‘hours test’ (has the employee worked on average 10 or more hours per week during the last 13 weeks)? This test is to be repeated after each 13 -week period. c. After six months of continuous employment: all employees are eligible. The previous Minister also agreed to adjustments to make the new eligibility criteria for FBS leave clearer 40. The new criteria accepted by Cabinet to determine employees’ eligibility for FBS leave did not include sufficient details explaining how it should be applied by employers (‘continuous employment’ is only defined in the Act for the purpose of annual leave and applying that definition would have introduced significant complex to FBAPS) . In 2022, the previous Minister agreed to a number of clarifications to the new eligibility criteria, to ensure the steps involved in the tests that are included in the new eligibility criteria are clear. The clarifications resulted in the following tests: a. First day of employment : Does the employee have agreed hours specified in employment agreement or an expectation of meeting the three or six -month criteria (an assessment by the employer, based on any available employment information and conducted in good faith, of whether there is an expectation that the employee will meet the criteria)? b. After three months of employment : Does the employee meet the ‘hours test’ (has the employee worked on average ten or more hours per week during the last three months, including hours paid as any form of paid leave)? c. After six months of employment : Does the employee meet the ‘hours test’ or the ‘ongoing work test’ (has the employee had no more than two continuous periods without work that are longer than four weeks over the last six months)? If the employee does not meet the eligibility criteria after six months of employment, these two tests must be repeated after each subsequent three -month period (or more frequently if the employer chooses to do so). The inclusion of an expectation judgement means the eligibility criteria remains complex 41. The test applied on the first day of employment involves a judgement about whether the employer expects the employee to meet the ‘hours test”. Such a judgement adds complexity and an opportunity for a difference of view between the employer and employee. 42. We recommend removing the expectations -based assessment that occurs on the first day of employment. This will mean that only employees with agreed hours in their employment agreement are eligible to FBS leave from their first day of employment, and all other employees are subject to the eligibility tests after three months of employment. 43. This would reduce the number of employees who employers would need to provide FBS leave to from their first day of employment and simplify the new eligibility criteria.
24 81. Other suggestions included:  using an accrual system for sick leave  remov ing time and a half for alternative ho lidays  address ing the Mondayisation issue related to public holidays (i.e. those not scheduled to work on Mondays are di sadvantaged in relation to public holidays)  increas ing the sick leave entitlement to 10 day s per year but with a cap of 20 days accumulated sick leave  allow ing sick leave to be taken in part days . Other suggestions 82. In addition to proposals in the areas o utlined above, a range of other suggestions were provided . These include removing the ‘parental leave’ override , providing approved software that employers could use or requiring payroll companies to gain some form of accreditation.
24 81. Other suggestions included:  using an accrual system for sick leave  remov ing time and a half for alternative ho lidays  address ing the Mondayisation issue related to public holidays (i.e. those not scheduled to work on Mondays are di sadvantaged in relation to public holidays)  increas ing the sick leave entitlement to 10 day s per year but with a cap of 20 days accumulated sick leave  allow ing sick leave to be taken in part days . Other suggestions 82. In addition to proposals in the areas o utlined above, a range of other suggestions were provided . These include removing the ‘parental leave’ override , providing approved software that employers could use or requiring payroll companies to gain some form of accreditation. 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
24 https://www.legislation.govt.nz/act/public/2017/0030/latest/whole.html 25 The Ministry of Justice stopped processing incoming and outgoing cheques after 31 May 2021: https://www.justice.govt.nz/about/news -and-media/news/the -ministry -is-phasing -out-payment -by-cheque/ 40 $ (excluding GST) Auditors register Unit Cost Proposed fee Proposed levies Proposed total charge Current charge (fee) Change in charge % change Registration/renewal of a licence 349.47 350.00 - 350.00 304.35 45.65 15% Annual confirmation 122.39 122.00 - 122.00 95.65 26.35 28%
24. The Taskforce also recommended a significant change to ho w annual holidays payments are calculated for employees returning from parental leave.
24. The proposals mean that, from the second year of employment onwards , an employee must be provided the ability to take four weeks off work at an agreed time during each year (unless they took AL in advance the year before or had unpaid leave and did not accrue four weeks). They maintain the flexibility for an employer to refuse a n employee’s request to take AL on spec ific dates if they have sound business reasons. This maintains an employer’s ability to negotiate with an employee about when during a year requested leave will be taken so that they can also manage their business operations. 25. The proposed adjust ment to the rule that an employer can require an employee to take accrued AL in excess of four weeks is more restrictive than the status quo (which applies to all AL entitlement that has arisen after 12 months of continuous employment ). It is the simplest option however and we think it likely reflects common practice and understanding for accrual -based systems in use. The rules for ‘cashing -up’ AL entitlement would require adjustments to reconcile them with weeks- based accrual 26. Under the Act an employee may reques t (unless the employer has a policy stating otherwise) to ‘cash up’ (exchange for payment) up to one week of their AL entitlement in each entitlement year (the 12 months of continuous employment beginning on the date on which the employee most recently became entitled to A L). 27. An adjustment is required to reconcile the rules for the period within which AL entitlement can be ‘cashed- up’ with a weeks -based accrual framework. We recommend that your May Cabinet paper seek s agreement to the following: • After the completion of the first 12 months of employment an employee may request to ‘cash up’ (exchange for payment) up to one week of accrued AL entitlement in each subsequent 12- month period. All other supporting provisions related to c ashing up AL would remain unchanged.7 28. This proposal maintains a waiting period to cash up a week of AL entitlement and a limit to the time period for doing so but changes the period from 12 months ‘continuous employment ’ to 12 months . It also retains the existing policy intent that only one week of
24/7 nature of work in health, and to the large number of complex allowances payable under health collective agreements.
2405XX; 2411XX; 2413XX to 2414XX; 2417XX; 2604XX
25 Section 4: Options de veloped and tested 83. The Taskforce developed and tested a number of options for changes to the way l eave entitlements are treated under the current Act . An initial set of options for change was developed… 84. The Taskforce developed the following five high -level options for change:  Option One used an entitlement based system with a proposed working arrangements test to define working patterns  Option Two used an entitlement based system with additional prescription to determine leave entitlements for non -standa rd working patterns  Options Three, Four and Five were all based on an accrual system with variations in the units that accrued: o In Option Three leave accrued on paid hours worked o In Option Four leave accrued on agreed hours o In Op tion Five leave accrued in weeks towards a four week fixed entitlement . …which were then tested with a specialist payroll advisor 85. Hudson Taylor, a professional services company with payroll expertise, was contracted by the Taskforce to provide independent advice to the Taskforce on the implications that the options would have if they were implemented across New Zealand. A key part of this testing was to ensure that options were tested against the wide range of working arrangements and employer types that can be found across the New Z ealand economy. 86. Hudson Taylor was initially contracted to undertake two stages of testing:  Stage One – a conceptual peer review to assess whether the options developed by the Taskforce were sound from a payroll systems perspective (i.e. capable of being i mplemented in payroll systems in New Zealand) .  Stage Two – detailed testing of the options developed by the Taskforce against anonymised payroll data to understand the impact these would have on different kinds of working arrangements present in the New Ze aland economy. 87. Following the Stage Two testing the options were refined and a pre ferred option emerged. 88. A final round of testing (Stage Three) was then undertaken by Hudson Taylor on the preferred option and other proposals developed by the Taskforce. Thes e other proposals included a prescriptive m ethodology for determining an ‘O therwise Working Day’ and a revised definition of ‘gross earnings’ to be used for leave payment calculations.
25. Currently, the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act 1987 overrides the ‘payment for annual holidays’ provisions in the Holidays Act, and states that for any annual holidays an employee becomes entitled to within 12 months of beginning a period of parental leave, they will only be paid at the rate of their average weekly earnings over the last 12 months.
25. During the issue identification phase of the 2018 Holidays Act Review
25. The working group identified some areas of the Taskforce’s recommendations that would benefit from greater clarity, some areas where there were gaps, and some where there were opportunities for simplification and to enhance their workability and implementation readiness for payroll systems. 26. MBIE also continued to engage with nominated representatives of the NZCTU and BusinessNZ during the policy design process on the development of solutions to the issues identified, and the tripartite consensus has been mainta ined . 27. The previous Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety agreed to a number of refinements, adjustments and additions to the recommendations. In accordance with the
26 New Zealand and overseas companies 43 $ (excluding GST) Register and Service Type Unit Cost Proposed fee Proposed levies Proposed total charge Current charge (fee + levy) Change in charge Disclose register Disclose: overseas offers Offer under Asia region funds passport (per fund) 717.36 720.00 - 720.00 521.74 198.26 Financial Service Providers register Registration 284.39 285.00 - 285.00 300.00 (15.00 ) Annual renewal 75.61 75.00 - 75.00 75.00 - Incorporated Societies register Registration# 44.22 45.00 27.00 72.00 88.89 (16.89) Annual return# 9.00 9.00 27.00 36.00 - 36.00 Restoration 224.87 225.00 - 225.00 177.78 47.22 Amalgamation 225.00 225.00 - 225.00 - 225.00 Conversion to be an incorporated society# 44.22 45.00 27.00 72.00 - 72.00 Limited Partnerships register Registration (New Zealand a nd overseas)# 387.94 388.00 27.00 415.00 217.39 197.61 Annual return (New Zealand and overseas)# - - 27.00 27.00 - 27.00 Building Societies, Friendly Societies and Credit Unions registers Registration# 149.73 150.00 27.00 177.00 217.39 (40.39) Annual return# 9.01 9.00 27.00 36.00 34.78 1.22 Annual return – Friendly society branch# 9.01 9.00 27.00 36.00 34.78 1.22 Registration of an Association of credit unions under section 145(1) of the Friendly Societies and Credit Unions Act# 149.73 150.00 27.00 177.00 355.56 (178.56) Credit Unions register For filing, under section 140 (2)(b) the Act, where a request to the Registrar is made to remove the credit union from the register. 311.11 - - 310.00 - 310.00 For filing, under section 135C (2) of the Act, a copy of a special resolution passed for the purpose of amalgamation or transfer of engagements. 355.56 - - 350.00 - 350.00 #CO levy $15.00, NZBN levy $12.00
26 Section 5: How the Taskforce made its decisions 89. The Taskforce cons idered the options it developed and tested against a range of criteria set out in the Terms of Reference. These criteria set out that t he Taskforce’s recommendations were expected to:  continue to promote the existing purpose of the Holidays Act 2003  provid e clarity and certainty for employers and employees so that employees receive their correct entitlements  be simpler than the current Act in relation to the provision of, and payment for, entitlements to holidays and leave  be readily implementable in a payr oll system  minimise compliance costs for employers  minimise perverse incentives on employers and employees  ensure the balance of decision -making between employers and employees when it comes to requests for holidays and leave is appropriately calibrated  be readily applicable to the full range of working and remuneration arrangements in the labour market both now and in the future  aim to protect overall entitlements for employees. 90. While the Taskforce considered all of these factors in its decision -making , it paid particular attention to the aims of providing clarity and certainty for employers and employees while aiming to protect overall entitlements for employees and ensuring that the recommendations could be implemented in the wide range of working arrange ments in place across the New Zealand economy. 91. Individual Taskforce members had a range of views about particular issues considered by the Taskforce. On some issues the Taskforce’s final recommendations may not reflect the personal views of individual mem bers but the Taskforce worked hard to ensure it could deliver a set of consensus recommendations without any ‘minority views’. The Taskforce considered a range of options before selecting its preferred system … 92. As noted earlier in the report, the Taskforce considered a range of options in the course of the review. One of the options supported in a number of submissions received by the Taskforce was an accrual model based on hours worked. Under this type of model , all employees would earn annual holidays in hours at a set percentage rate (7.69% of every hour worked would give employees the equivalent of four weeks leave per year). The employee’s leave balance would accrue in hours as they worked and any annual holidays taken would be calculated in hours. Emplo yees would receive leave based on their arrangements at the time they ‘earnt’ the hours (rather than at the time of taking leave). 93. This type of accrual system was supported by some stakeholders and opposed by others. The testing of the accrual options iden tified that such a system would leave some people worse off. As a result, the Taskforce did not proceed with further development of an hours -based accrual system. 94. All members agree that the recommendations in this report provide a solution that meets the objectives of the review. Consensus would not have been achievable on any other approach . 95. A weekly entitlement system was selected by the Taskforce as its preferred option. The Taskforce considered that this option struck a good balance between retaining certain aspects of the current Act such as the existing units of entitlement while adding the
26 Section 5: How the Taskforce made its decisions 89. The Taskforce cons idered the options it developed and tested against a range of criteria set out in the Terms of Reference. These criteria set out that t he Taskforce’s recommendations were expected to:  continue to promote the existing purpose of the Holidays Act 2003  provid e clarity and certainty for employers and employees so that employees receive their correct entitlements  be simpler than the current Act in relation to the provision of, and payment for, entitlements to holidays and leave  be readily implementable in a payr oll system  minimise compliance costs for employers  minimise perverse incentives on employers and employees  ensure the balance of decision -making between employers and employees when it comes to requests for holidays and leave is appropriately calibrated  be readily applicable to the full range of working and remuneration arrangements in the labour market both now and in the future  aim to protect overall entitlements for employees. 90. While the Taskforce considered all of these factors in its decision -making , it paid particular attention to the aims of providing clarity and certainty for employers and employees while aiming to protect overall entitlements for employees and ensuring that the recommendations could be implemented in the wide range of working arrange ments in place across the New Zealand economy. 91. Individual Taskforce members had a range of views about particular issues considered by the Taskforce. On some issues the Taskforce’s final recommendations may not reflect the personal views of individual mem bers but the Taskforce worked hard to ensure it could deliver a set of consensus recommendations without any ‘minority views’. The Taskforce considered a range of options before selecting its preferred system … 92. As noted earlier in the report, the Taskforce considered a range of options in the course of the review. One of the options supported in a number of submissions received by the Taskforce was an accrual model based on hours worked. Under this type of model , all employees would earn annual holidays in hours at a set percentage rate (7.69% of every hour worked would give employees the equivalent of four weeks leave per year). The employee’s leave balance would accrue in hours as they worked and any annual holidays taken would be calculated in hours. Emplo yees would receive leave based on their arrangements at the time they ‘earnt’ the hours (rather than at the time of taking leave). 93. This type of accrual system was supported by some stakeholders and opposed by others. The testing of the accrual options iden tified that such a system would leave some people worse off. As a result, the Taskforce did not proceed with further development of an hours -based accrual system. 94. All members agree that the recommendations in this report provide a solution that meets the objectives of the review. Consensus would not have been achievable on any other approach . 95. A weekly entitlement system was selected by the Taskforce as its preferred option. The Taskforce considered that this option struck a good balance between retaining certain aspects of the current Act such as the existing units of entitlement while adding the 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
26 Section 5: Proposed fees and total charges for all registers This section sets out the proposed fees given the level of cost to be recovered after levy revenue has been applied to each register. The tables within each subsection show what the total charge for specific register services would be, made up of proposed fees and applicable proposed levies . Questions have been included, and y our feedback is sought for any or all registers.
26. Because the employee’s average weekly earnings (from their employer) during parental leave will usually be $0, and parental leave periods can be up to 52 weeks long, this means that some employees can take their leave but are entitled to be paid
26. In a standard restructuring situation (involving types of employees not specified in Schedule 1A of the Employment Relations Act 2000
26. Instead, to provide some flexibility to employers, the Minister agreed to retain the calendar day methodology as the default methodology for calculating the hours that would have been worked on a day of FBAPS leave, but provided the option for an employment agreement to specify that the employer will use the employee’s average hours across all days worked. 27. This means that, while the methodology for calculating the hours that would have been worked on
26. Table 1 below provides an overview of each key part of the Act. Table 1: Key parts of the Holidays Act 2003 Part Key sections Part 1 Preliminary provisions  The commencement, purpose and overview of the Act, as well as how it is to be interpreted and applied  Key definitions, including ordinary weekly pay, relevant daily pay and average daily pay  Guidance about how to determine what would otherwise be a working day Part 2 Holid ay and leave entitlements  Entitlement to, and payment for, annual holidays  Calculations and obligations regarding holiday pay  Provisions relating to c losedown periods  Relationship between annual holidays and other entitlements (e.g. sick leave, bereavement leave)  Entitlement to , and payment for , public ho lidays  Transferring public holidays and alternative holidays  Relationship between public holidays and other entitlements (e.g. sick leave, bereavement leave)  Entitlement to , and payment for , sick leave and bereavement leave Part 3 Enforcement and other matters  Employer and employee obligations under the Act  Who can enforce the Act and penalties for non -
27 February 2019 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:06:16
27 necessary level of prescription to give employers and employees the certainty that they need. 96. Retaining the annual holidays entitlement in weeks ha s the benefit of ‘automatically adjusting’ to an employee’s changed circumstances . If an employee increases or decreases their hours then as long as their annual leave entitlement is held in weeks, this entitlement will automatically adjust to the changed hours (e.g. if an employee increases their hours from 20 to 30 hours per week, then one week’s annual holiday entitlement automatically becomes worth 30 hours rather than 20 hours). 97. This option was selected by the Taskforce as its preferred option and refined through further testing . Further details about the component parts of the recommended option are included in the next section. …and carried out some targeted consultation with the payroll industry 98. In September 2019 the Taskforce consulted with representatives fro m the payroll industry on its draft recommendations that were expected to have the most significant impact on payroll systems . The feedback contained a range of views with some respondents expressing support for some proposals but noting concerns with othe r proposals. 99. The Taskforce made changes to its proposals in light of the responses r eceived. For example, following feedback about the complexity that would be involved in the proposal to apportion commission or incentive payments across pay periods, the Taskforce decided not to progress with this proposal. 100. A number of specific technical points were also raised in the feedback which the Taskforce acknowledges will need to be addressed in the detailed design phase that will be required before the pr oposed ch anges are implemented .
27% of the New Zealand adult population has participated in a cycle tourism activity in the past year.
27. Further information relating to the Act can be found at the following :  The Act itself can be found at: http://www.legislation.govt.nz/act/public/2003/0129/latest/DLM236387.html  The Employment New Zealand website: https://www.employment.govt.nz/leave- and-holidays/  Holidays Act guidance: https://www.employment.govt.nz/assets/Uploads/Holidays- Act-2003-Guidance- on-annual-holidays-Sep-2017v1.pdf  The Employment Law Database, which contains Holidays Act-related determinations from the Employment Relations Authority: http://apps.employment.govt.nz/determinations/  Holidays Act-related judgments made by the Employment Court of New Zealand: https://www.employmentcourt.govt.nz/judgments/
27. The ‘parental leave override’ has been criticised as discriminating against parents who take time off to care for their young children, and the issue has a disproportionate impact on women.
28 Section 6: Final recommendations 101. This section outlines the final recommendations of the Taskforce across the following sections:  process for leave calculations and payments  annual holidays entitlements  annual holidays payments  FBAPS leave entitlements  other proposed changes . 102. A comparison of the main holiday and leave entitlements under the Holidays Act 2003 and the Taskforce’s prop osals can be found in Annex 2. Process for leave calculations and payments Issue 1 – Calculating l eave payments 103. One of the main issue s with the current Act is the number of calculations and lack of clarity about how to calculate leave payments for the various forms of leave. 104. The Taskforce has discussed a range of options for addressing this by provi ding greater clarity and prescription about the process for determining the amount of leave to be used and the payments for any period of leave. 105. The Taskforce considered a single process for calculating leave payments for all forms of paid leave. However, it ultimately concluded that separate methodologies should be retained for calculating annual leave and FBAPS leave. 106. Annual leave entitlements are based on average weekly earnings and annual leave payments take account of work carried out over the previou s 12 months. There is an expectation that the whole of the annual leave entitlement will be used to ensure that employees have a minimum of four weeks paid leave from work each year. 107. In contrast there is no expectation that an employee should use all of th eir FBAPS entitlement (with the exception of the public and alternative holidays leave). FBAPS leave exists to provide employees with paid leave for particular events (e.g. a public holiday, an episode of sickness or the death of a close relative). Payment s for FBAPS leave should, to the greatest extent possible, reflect what the employee would have earnt if they had worked on the specific day in question. 108. The Taskforce considered, therefore, that the different policy rationales for the different forms of leave was best accommodated in a system where each form of leave continued to be treated separately, albeit with greater prescription about the specific methodologies to be followed . 109. The methodologies provide clear rules to be followed at each step of the process to provide the certainty that is missing from the current Act (for example, how to determine a week for an employee if this is not set out in an employment agreement or work roster). The process es to be followed for FBAPS and annual leave are set o ut in the diagram on page 31. 110. This approach is intended to provide a clear set of rules that employers can use when processing requests for each form of leave. The specific rules that would apply to each step are covered in the following sections. Annual leave payments 111. The approach proposed by the Taskforce includes a new concept of Ordin ary Leave Pay (OLP). OLP is a new calculation intended to replace the existing Relevant Daily Pay and
28 Section 6: Final recommendations 101. This section outlines the final recommendations of the Taskforce across the following sections:  process for leave calculations and payments  annual holidays entitlements  annual holidays payments  FBAPS leave entitlements  other proposed changes . 102. A comparison of the main holiday and leave entitlements under the Holidays Act 2003 and the Taskforce’s prop osals can be found in Annex 2. Process for leave calculations and payments Issue 1 – Calculating l eave payments 103. One of the main issue s with the current Act is the number of calculations and lack of clarity about how to calculate leave payments for the various forms of leave. 104. The Taskforce has discussed a range of options for addressing this by provi ding greater clarity and prescription about the process for determining the amount of leave to be used and the payments for any period of leave. 105. The Taskforce considered a single process for calculating leave payments for all forms of paid leave. However, it ultimately concluded that separate methodologies should be retained for calculating annual leave and FBAPS leave. 106. Annual leave entitlements are based on average weekly earnings and annual leave payments take account of work carried out over the previou s 12 months. There is an expectation that the whole of the annual leave entitlement will be used to ensure that employees have a minimum of four weeks paid leave from work each year. 107. In contrast there is no expectation that an employee should use all of th eir FBAPS entitlement (with the exception of the public and alternative holidays leave). FBAPS leave exists to provide employees with paid leave for particular events (e.g. a public holiday, an episode of sickness or the death of a close relative). Payment s for FBAPS leave should, to the greatest extent possible, reflect what the employee would have earnt if they had worked on the specific day in question. 108. The Taskforce considered, therefore, that the different policy rationales for the different forms of leave was best accommodated in a system where each form of leave continued to be treated separately, albeit with greater prescription about the specific methodologies to be followed . 109. The methodologies provide clear rules to be followed at each step of the process to provide the certainty that is missing from the current Act (for example, how to determine a week for an employee if this is not set out in an employment agreement or work roster). The process es to be followed for FBAPS and annual leave are set o ut in the diagram on page 31. 110. This approach is intended to provide a clear set of rules that employers can use when processing requests for each form of leave. The specific rules that would apply to each step are covered in the following sections. Annual leave payments 111. The approach proposed by the Taskforce includes a new concept of Ordin ary Leave Pay (OLP). OLP is a new calculation intended to replace the existing Relevant Daily Pay and 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
28 former quota refugees who arrived in New Zealand in 2016 were interviewed for the research. Around half of those interviewed were men (15) and half were women (13) and the top countries of origin were Bhutan (8), Syria (5) and Colombia (4). Six participants were aged 18 to 24, 17 were aged 25 to 44, and five were aged 45 and over.
28,000 potential fires still in New Zealanders homes
28. The Taskforce recommended removing the parental leave override, which would mean that, for parents returning from parental leave, any annual holidays they became entitled to while on parental leave (or soon after returning to work) would be paid at the sam e rate as other annual holidays.
28. the high altitude provisions will be drafted as a separate part of the Bill so that they operate as a set of standalone requirements and definitions. This also means that, if necessary, they can be decoupled from the main outer space provisions without impacting on the integrity of those parts of the Bill. I also propose that the title of the new Act be amended from the Space Activities Act to the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act. 5 7yr8upqmdi 2016-06-08 10:26:43 s 9(2)(f)(iv) s 9(2)(h), s 9(2)(j) s 9(2)(h), s 9(2)(j) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act RESTRICTED Defining the lower limit at which the high altitude regime will apply 29.There are three main options for defining the limit at which the high altitude regime will apply. The following table lists the options and the advantages and disadvantages associated with them: Option Comment 1. Reference to flight level 999 (about 30km above ground)This is the limit of New Zealand’s flight information region. The advantage of using this limit is that it effectively represents the upper limit of airspace likely to be subject to air traffic control and used by ‘ordinary’ civil aircraft providing air services. 2. Reference to an altitude of 20km above groundThis is a height at which some scientists believe ‘near space’ begins. Its disadvantage is that it may appear arbitrary. 3. Reference to flight level 600 (about 18km above ground)This is the current altitude that is the limit of controlled airspace in New Zealand. As the limits of controlled airspace are made by a designation under the CA Act, this option also has a practical connection with the civil aviation regime which is helpful given the need to harmonise certain criteria for authorising activities under the two regimes. 30.The group of officials referred to in paragraph 24 recommend that the appropriate limit at which the high altitude regime will apply should be set with reference to flight level 600 (option 3 above). This option strikes a balance between: the risks of setting the limit too high and thereby failing to regulate activities occurring between this limit and the lower options; the risks of setting the limit too low and thereby inadvertently bringing within the scope of the regulatory regime a whole lot of activity that we do not want to capture. It is possible that flight level 600 will capture aircraft such as weather balloons which are not intended to be in scope. However, this can be dealt with by including a power for the responsible Minister to make regulations that exempt or exclude, as may be appropriate, specified vehicles or aircraft or classes of vehicles or aircraft which undertake certain activities that are not intended to be subject to the high altitude regulatory regime, and are otherwise regulated as appropriate under civil aviation law; and the need to ensure an efficient alignment between the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act and the CA Act, and to reduce any uncertainty and complexity in relation to the interface between the two regimes. 31. 6 7yr8upqmdi 2016-06-08 10:26:43 s 6(a) s 6(a) s 6(a) s 9(2)(h), s 9(2)(j) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act RESTRICTED 32.The current review of the CA Act will provide a further opportunity to ensure consistency and alignment of the regulatory regimes in the (new) Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act and the (revised) CA Act in relation to high altitude activities. There will also be a review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act three years after its enactment, which will provide a further opportunity to ensure harmonisation between the two regulatory regimes. National security assessment process 33.The domestic regulation of space and high altitude activities is new for New Zealand, and requires consideration of how best to manage national security risks that may arise from these activities. 34.In December 2015, Cabinet agreed that the responsible Minister must not grant a licence if:  the grant of a licence would be inconsistent with New Zealand’s international obligations; or  the Minister in Charge of the New Zealand Security Intelligence Service (NZSIS) certifies that the grant of a licence would pose an undue risk to national security; or  the responsible Minister is not satisfied the applicant is a ‘fit and proper’ person; or  the grant of a licence would be contrary to New Zealand’s national interests (EGI 15 Min 0175 refers). 35.Under New Zealand law, national security issues are managed in different ways ranging from The Telecommunications Interception Capability and Security Act 2013 where a national security Minister has powers of direction to address national security issues to the regimes in Passports and Immigration law where the decision on national security risk is left to the responsible Minister. 36.The Minister in Charge of the NZSIS and Responsible for the GCSB and I would like to consider a new model for the proposed Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act. This is described below. Proposed national security regime as it would apply to the space regime The consultation process 37.When considering an application for, renewal of, or change to a space licence or permit (or a high altitude licence[1]), the Minister responsible for the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act (the responsible Minister) will receive information and advice from the Minister in Charge of the NZSIS and/or the Minister Responsible for the GCSB about any actual and [1][1] A space licence is required for the launch into space of one or more launch vehicles of a specified type. A space permit is required for the launch into space or one or more payloads of a specified type. A high altitude licence is required for the launch of one or more vehicles of a specified type capable of reaching high altitude , whether or not carrying a payload. 7 7yr8upqmdi 2016-06-08 10:26:43 s 9(2)(h), s 9(2)(j) s 9(2)(f)(iv) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act RESTRICTED potential national security risks, whether those risks can be mitigated, and (if so) the mitigation measures recommended. 38.The consultation process may conclude that there are no significant national security risks from the proposed application, or that any risks identified can be adequately mitigated through changes to the proposed activity or through imposing conditions on it. The responsible Minister may impose conditions on a space licence, space permit, or high altitude licence that he or she considers necessary and desirable to protect national security. When considering whether to impose a discretionary condition, the responsible Minister must consult with the Minister in Charge of the NZSIS and the Minister Responsible for the GCSB. 39.It is also proposed that the consultation process apply when: the responsible Minister considers whether an authorisation granted in a country other than New Zealand be treated as a space licence or permit; for the renewal of a space licence or permit; or for changes to a licensee or permit holder. The consultation process will also apply to the granting, renewal, variation, revocation or suspension of a high altitude licence. The certification process 40.The consultation process will be sufficient to manage most national security risks. However, in the event that either the Minister in Charge of the NZSIS and Responsible for the GCSB and the Minister responsible for the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act consider that there is a significant security risk and that the risks are not sufficiently mitigated, either Minister can refer the application to a specified group of Ministers (including the Prime Minister, the Minister in Charge of the NZSIS, the Minister Responsible for the GCSB, the Minister responsible for the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act, the Minister of Defence, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, and any other Minister specified by the Prime Minister). 41.The Minister in Charge of the NZSIS and Responsible for the GCSB can issue a certificate vetoing the activity, with the agreement of the specified group of Ministers. 42.Where a certificate is issued, the responsible Minister will decline the licence or permit accordingly. 43.In all cases, a national security risk assessment will be undertaken. However, the administrative arrangements that sit behind the decision on the national security certificate will not be included in the legislation as the level of detail would unnecessarily complicate the legislation. 44.The certification process will not limit the responsible Minister’s authority to consider an application for, a renewal of, or a change to a licence for a space or high altitude activity. 8 7yr8upqmdi 2016-06-08 10:26:43 s 6(a) s 6(a) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act RESTRICTED Dealing with national security issues in court proceedings Offences and penalties under the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act 49.In December, Cabinet agreed that there should be offences necessary to support the Space Activities Bill with penalties that apply to comparable conduct under existing criminal law. This paper seeks Cabinet approval to detailed offence and penalty provisions to include in the Bill. The Ministry of Justice has been consulted and their advice has been incorporated into these proposals. 9 7yr8upqmdi 2016-06-08 10:26:43 s 9(2)(f)(iv) s 9(2)(f)(iv), s 9(2)(g)(i) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act RESTRICTED Licensing offences 50.The nearest domestic analogue for the licencing aspects of the regime is the penalty regime in the CA Act, although it is arguable that there is the potential for greater harm arising from licensing offences against the space regime (including public safety, national security, international relations, and international liability for damage). 51.A matter of importance in relation to very serious licencing offences in the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Bill is that there is power to arrest offenders and, if necessary, to extradite them back to New Zealand from another country. This requires these types of offences to be imprisonable. 52.The CA Act provides for an additional financial penalty of three times the value of any commercial gain resulting from a licencing offence where the offence is committed for commercial gain. I propose adopting the same approach under this regime. 53.I propose that the following licensing offences and penalties be adopted: a. Launching or procuring the launch of a space object without a permit. This offence will be punishable by: in the case of an individual, a term of imprisonment not exceeding one year, or a fine not exceeding $50,000, or both; and in the case of a body corporate, a fine not exceeding $250,000; b. Intentionally failing to comply with conditions of a permit. This offence will be punishable by: in the case of an individual, a term of imprisonment not exceeding one year, or a fine not exceeding $50,000, or both; and in the case of a body corporate, a fine not exceeding $250,000; c. Failing to comply with a licence or permit condition. This offence will be punishable by: in the case of an individual, a fine not exceeding $2,000; and in the case of a body corporate, a fine not exceeding $10,000. d. Penalty for commercial gain or Crown international law liability. I propose an additional penalty of three times the amount of any commercial gain where the offence is committed for commercial gain. This additional penalty is modelled on s47 of the CA Act and seems appropriate given the well-financed nature of the space industry. e. There will also be offences for operating a high altitude vehicle without a permit, failing to comply with high altitude permit conditions, and making false and misleading statements in a permit application. These will attract the same penalties as the licencing offences under the space regime. Interference (with a space object) offences 54.The offences relating to ‘interference with space objects’ are necessary to implement our international obligations under the TSA with the US and are akin to the trade secrets offence in the Crimes Act 1961. This offence is punishable by a term of imprisonment not exceeding five years. The TSA is cast in absolute terms, which means that there will need to be a strict liability offence punishable by a fine. However it is proposed that there also be more serious offences punishable by five years’ imprisonment for interference with space objects with intent to obtain a trade secret. 55.The TSA also requires us to have offences relating to security and enhanced security areas, including offences relating to failing to display identity badges. Of these, the most serious relates to being found in a security area and requested by an enforcement officer to leave 10 7yr8upqmdi 2016-06-08 10:26:43 Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act RESTRICTED but refusing to do so. This is akin to a trespass offence and we propose that it be penalised accordingly. 56.I propose the following interference offences and penalties: a. Interfering with a launch vehicle or payload with intent to obtain a trade secret . This offence will be punishable in the case of an individual with a term of imprisonment not exceeding five years, or a fine not exceeding $100,000, or both; and in the case of a body corporate, a fine not exceeding $500,000; b. Interfering with a space object or payload without a lawful excuse . This offence will be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 in the case of an individual; and in the case of a body corporate, a fine not exceeding $10,000. These lower penalties reflect the less culpable nature of this offence compared to the offence in e) above; c. Refusing to state name, address, authority to be in security area, or refusal to leave a security area after an enforcement officer asks . This offence will be punishable by: in the case of an individual, a term of imprisonment not exceeding three months and/or a fine not exceeding $2,000, or both; or for minor offending, an infringement offence with a fine not exceeding $1,000. d. Failure to maintain a system for ensuring persons in a secure area wear identity cards. This offence will be punishable by a fine not exceeding $50,000 in the case of an individual; and in the case of a body corporate, a fine not exceeding $100,000. False or misleading information 57.I propose the following offences and penalties in relation to supplying false and misleading information: a. False and misleading information in a licence application . This offence will be punishable by a fine not exceeding $10,000 in the case of an individual; and in the case of a body corporate a fine not exceeding $50,000; or for minor offending where someone unintentionally provides false or misleading information in a final license application, there could be an infringement offence not exceeding $1,000. b. Providing false or misleading information to an enforcement officer. This offence will be punishable by: in the case of an individual a fine not exceeding $10,000; and in the case of a body corporate a fine not exceeding $50,000; or for minor offending where someone unintentionally provides false or misleading information there could be an infringement offence of $1,000. Proposal that the review of the Act be a legislative requirement 58.Cabinet has agreed that there will be a review of the Act three years after its enactment. I propose that the review should be a legislative requirement as this will create certainty to all interested parties that the review will be undertaken and also provide assurance that, while the legislation has some novel elements, there is a clear process to review and adjust these requirements as needed. Authorisation for a group of Ministers to take technical decisions during the final drafting stages 11 7yr8upqmdi 2016-06-08 10:26:43 Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act RESTRICTED 59.There may be a number of additional second order policy decisions that are required in order to finalise the legislation so that it can be introduced into the House in August. 60.For this reason, I wish to retain the Cabinet authority given to the following group of Ministers (the Minister for Economic Development, the Minister of Defence, the Minister in Charge of the NZSIS and Responsible for the GCSB, and the Minister of Transport) to take any second order policy decisions required to finalise the legislation before it is introduced into the House. I propose to amend this list to also include the Minister of Foreign Affairs. Consultation 61.The following government agencies have been consulted: the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, the Ministry of Transport, the New Zealand Defence Force, the Ministry of Defence, the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, the New Zealand Security Intelligence Service, the Government Communications Security Bureau, the Ministry of Justice, The Treasury, and the New Zealand Police. The Department of Land Information New Zealand has been consulted on the high altitude proposals in the paper. Financial Implications 62.The set-up costs associated with developing the space and high altitude activities regime are being absorbed by agencies until the new legislation is enacted. The law will establish regulations to enable the costs of regulatory work (e.g. the granting of licences and permits, monitoring and enforcement) to be met by the parties that benefit from the regulatory activity. An implementation work stream has been established by MBIE that will identify the resourcing implications associated with the new space policy and regulatory functions, and any ongoing budget implications will be addressed in the 2017 Budget. Human Rights 63.MBIE will work with the Ministry of Justice during the drafting process to address any Bill of Rights issues that arise. Legislative Implications 64.The Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Bill has a category 2 on the 2016 legislative programme. The Bill will be presented to the Cabinet Legislation Committee in August following the completion of the parliamentary treaty examination process of the Technology Safeguards Agreement Treaty. 65.I propose to release a disclosure draft of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Bill for targeted consultation. In the first instance I propose to make it available to the Foreign Affairs, Trade and Defence Select Committee for its information to assist with their consideration of the Technology Safeguards Agreement (TSA) Treaty. I consider that the Bill will provide important context for how the New Zealand proposes to facilitate the development of a safe, secure and responsible space industry of which the TSA is but one part. 12 7yr8upqmdi 2016-06-08 10:26:43 s 9(2 )(f) (iv) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act RESTRICTED Regulatory Impact Analysis 66.When the original Cabinet decisions on the development of a regulatory regime for commercial space launches from New Zealand were sought, a Regulatory Impact Statement (RIS) was prepared. This Cabinet paper extends the space regime to include certain high altitude activities and the RIS has been amended accordingly to reflect this, and is attached to the Cabinet paper. The inclusion of certain high altitude activities within the space regime does not significantly change the costs and benefits associated with the development of a domestic regulatory regime for space activities. Publicity 67.I intend to issue a public announcement that the Government is developing a comprehensive and robust regulatory regime to enable commercial space launches and the operation of payloads to take place from New Zealand and to regulate certain high altitude activities. I am considering making the announcement after Cabinet has considered the proposed TSA text, which is planned to take place on 30 May. Recommendations The Minister for Economic Development recommends that the Committee: 68.Note that a small number of policy issues have arisen during the development of a domestic regulatory regime for commercial space launches and the operation of payloads from New Zealand, including: a. a proposal to include certain high altitude (‘near space’) activities within the scope of the space regulatory regime; b. the decision-making process for the issue of a national security certificate (which has the effect of a veto on the proposed activity); c. the offences and penalties regime under the new Act; and d. confirmation that the review of the new Act after three years will be a legislative requirement. High altitude (‘near space’) regime 69.Note that developments in technology mean that high altitude vehicles operating in ‘near space’ are being designed to provide a range of functions similar to satellites including earth observation, surveillance, communications, maritime control and internet connectivity; 70.Agree that New Zealand needs to be well positioned to control future activities carried out at high altitudes that originate from New Zealand’s territory; 71.Agree that a high altitude activities regime be included as a separate part in the proposed Outer Space Activities Bill to control activities carried out at high altitudes that originate from New Zealand, and specifically that: 13 7yr8upqmdi 2016-06-08 10:26:43 Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act RESTRICTED a. Payloads that New Zealand authorities deem to be capable of being operated at very high altitudes are within the scope of the proposed space regime; and b. High altitude vehicles (i.e. the carrier systems that New Zealand authorities deem to be capable of taking payloads up into the high altitude region) are also within the scope of the proposed legislation, but (if they are aircraft) the safety aspects of their operation will still be addressed through established Civil Aviation Authority procedures; 73. Agree that the lower limit at which the high altitude regime will apply to certain vehicles that originate from New Zealand will be set with reference to flight level 600 (this is currently the altitude that is the limit of controlled airspace in New Zealand and is about 18kms above ground); 74. Agree that the responsible Minister will have the ability to make regulations that exempt or exclude (as may be appropriate) specified vehicles or aircraft or classes of vehicles or aircraft which undertake certain activities that are not intended to be subject to the high altitude regulatory regime and are otherwise regulated as appropriate under aviation legislation and regulations; 75. Agree that the title of the proposed legislation be the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act; National security considerations 76. Note that a strong and credible national security regime is a precondition for space launches to take place from New Zealand; 77. Note that, in December 2015, Cabinet agreed that the responsible Minister must not grant a licence if: a. the grant of a licence would be inconsistent with New Zealand’s international obligations; or b. the Minister in Charge of the New Zealand Security Intelligence Service (NZSIS) certifies that the grant of a licence would pose an undue risk to national security; or c. the responsible Minister is not satisfied that the applicant is a ‘fit and proper’ person; or d. the grant of a licence would be contrary to New Zealand’s national interests; 78. Agree (subject to legislative drafting) to a model for managing national security considerations comprising the following elements to be applied in the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act: 14 7yr8upqmdi 2016-06-08 10:26:43 s 6(a), s 9(2)(h), s 9(2)(j) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act RESTRICTED a. The national security Minister(s) would be consulted as part of the decision- making process on the proposed activity. b. The nature and significance of the risk and extent to which it can be mitigated would be taken into account in the decision-making process (both Ministers can agree on the mitigations that should be imposed). c. In the event that either Minister believes a launch should not proceed, the matter is referred to the specified group of Ministers designated by the Prime Minister. d. The Minister in Charge of the NZSIS and Responsible for the GCSB can issue a certificate vetoing the activity, with the agreement of the specified group of Ministers. Offences and penalties 82. Agree that the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act will provide for the following offences and penalties based on similar domestic analogues: a. Launching or procuring the launch of a space object without a permit. This offence will be punishable by: in the case of an individual, a term of imprisonment not exceeding one year, or a fine not exceeding $50,000, or both; and in the case of a body corporate, a fine not exceeding $250,000; b. Intentionally failing to comply with conditions of a permit. This offence will be punishable by: in the case of an individual, a term of imprisonment not exceeding one year, or a fine not exceeding $50,000, or both; and in the case of a body corporate, a fine not exceeding $250,000; c. Failing to comply with a licence or permit condition. This offence will be punishable by: in the case of an individual, a fine not exceeding $2,000; and in the case of a body corporate, a fine not exceeding $10,000; d. Penalty for commercial gain or Crown international law liability of three times the amount of any commercial gain where the offence is committed for commercial gain; e. There will also be offences for operating a high altitude vehicle without a permit, failing to comply with high altitude permit conditions, and providing false and misleading statements in a permit application. These will attract the same penalties as the licencing offences under the space regime; 15 7yr8upqmdi 2016-06-08 10:26:43 s 9(2)(f)(iv) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act RESTRICTED f. Interfering with a launch vehicle or payload with intent to obtain a trade secret. This offence will be punishable in the case of an individual with a term of imprisonment not exceeding five years, or a fine not exceeding $100,000, or both; and in the case of a body corporate, a fine not exceeding $500,000; g. Interfering with a space object or payload without a lawful excuse. This offence will be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 in the case of an individual; and in the case of a body corporate, a fine not exceeding $10,000; h. Refusing to state name, address, authority to be in security area, or refusal to leave a security area after an enforcement officer asks. This offence will be punishable by: in the case of an individual, a term of imprisonment not exceeding three months and/or a fine not exceeding $2,000, or both; or for minor offending, an infringement offence with a fine not exceeding $1,000; i. Failure to maintain a system for ensuring persons in a secure area wear identity cards. This offence will be punishable by a fine not exceeding $50,000 in the case of an individual; and in the case of a body corporate, a fine not exceeding $100,000; j. Providing false and misleading information in a licence application. This offence will be punishable by a fine not exceeding $10,000 in the case of an individual; and in the case of a body corporate, a fine not exceeding $50,000; or for minor offending where someone unintentionally provides false or misleading information in a final license application, there could be an infringement offence not exceeding $1,000; k. Providing false or misleading information to an enforcement officer. This offence will be punishable by: in the case of an individual, a fine not exceeding $10,000; and in the case of a body corporate, a fine not exceeding $50,000; or for minor offending where someone unintentionally provides false or misleading information there could be an infringement offence of $1,000; Requirement to review the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act 83.Note that Cabinet has agreed that the Act be reviewed three years after its enactment; 84.Agree that the review of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act three years after its enactment be a legislative requirement; 85.Agree that the following group of Ministers (the Minister for Economic Development, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, the Minister of Transport, the Minister of Defence, the Minister in Charge of the NZSIS, the Minister Responsible for the GCSB) be authorised to take any technical decisions required to finalise the legislation before it is introduced into the House; 16 7yr8upqmdi 2016-06-08 10:26:43 Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act RESTRICTED Release of disclosure draft of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Bill 86.Agree that the Minister of Economic Development releases a disclosure draft of the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Bill for targeted consultation; 87.Agree that the disclosure draft Bill be provided to the Foreign Affairs, Trade and Defence Select Committee for its information; Authorised for lodgement Hon Steven Joyce, Minister for Economic Development, and Science and Innovation 17 7yr8upqmdi 2016-06-08 10:26:43 Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act
283 submissions on the discussion document
29 Ordinary Weekly Pay calculations. OLP would include the base rate for any hours worked in the relevant period, plus pay for any scheduled overtime, allowances, incentive or commission payments that the employee would have received if they had worked for the relevant period. 112. The underlying principle for OLP is that it shoul d capture all payments that the employee would have received if the employee had been at work for the period in question. This is to ensure that, while on paid leave, the employee is paid a minimum of what they would have been paid if they were at work for the relevant period. 113. Section 8 of the Act states that annual holiday pay should be paid based on average earnings over the last four weeks if OWP cannot be calculated. The Taskforce considered whether the four week average earnings calculation should be replaced by a 13 -week average earnings calculation. However, testing undertaken by the Taskforce noted that removing the four week average earnings calculation could disadvantage some employees in particular situations (e.g. employees who take leave just a fter a busy period of work for whom the four week average earnings calculation is used because it is not possible to calculate OWP). The Taskforce therefore considers that further work would be required to determine whether a four or 13 week averaging peri od would be the most appropriate period to consider alongside OLP and the 52 week average when calculating annual holiday pay . 114. Currently Section 21 of the Act states that annual holi day pay must be the greater of OWP or the employee’s average weekly earni ngs over the last 52 weeks. In some circumstances this can result in an employee’s income reducing when they are on leave when compared to their income from directly before the leave. For example, if an employee had worked at an increased level of income d ue to, for example, a seasonal variation . The Taskforce is proposing to address this issue by introducing a new average weekly pay calculation over the last four or 13 w eeks . FBAPS leave payments 115. The process for calculating FBAPS leave payments is set out in the diagram on page 3 1 and includes the following key steps: a) Determine that the day in question is an Otherwise Working Day (see separate section on this issue) b) Determine the number of hours that would have been worked on the day in question – this sho uld be determined by the hours set out in an employment agreement or roster. If no hours of work are set out in an employment agreement or roster then the expected hours of work should be calculated by the average hours worked across all corresponding days worked in the previous 13 weeks (e.g. if the day in question is a Mon day, then an average of the hours worked on all of the Mondays worked in the previous 13 weeks ) c) Calculate Average Daily Pay for the day in question – this should be done by calculating t he hourly pay rate (based on the total earnings in the last 13 weeks divided by the total weekly hours worked in the last 13 weeks) and then multiplying the hourly rate by the number of hours that would have been worked on the day in question d) Pay the great er of the Average Daily Pay and Ordinary Leave Pay for the day in question e) If an employer uses an employment agreement or roster to calculate the hours worked on the day in question in (b) above, then weekly hours from an employment agreement or roster mus t be used in the weekly calculation to determine the hourly pay rate in (c) above. If an employer uses actual hours worked to calculate the hours
29 Ordinary Weekly Pay calculations. OLP would include the base rate for any hours worked in the relevant period, plus pay for any scheduled overtime, allowances, incentive or commission payments that the employee would have received if they had worked for the relevant period. 112. The underlying principle for OLP is that it shoul d capture all payments that the employee would have received if the employee had been at work for the period in question. This is to ensure that, while on paid leave, the employee is paid a minimum of what they would have been paid if they were at work for the relevant period. 113. Section 8 of the Act states that annual holiday pay should be paid based on average earnings over the last four weeks if OWP cannot be calculated. The Taskforce considered whether the four week average earnings calculation should be replaced by a 13 -week average earnings calculation. However, testing undertaken by the Taskforce noted that removing the four week average earnings calculation could disadvantage some employees in particular situations (e.g. employees who take leave just a fter a busy period of work for whom the four week average earnings calculation is used because it is not possible to calculate OWP). The Taskforce therefore considers that further work would be required to determine whether a four or 13 week averaging peri od would be the most appropriate period to consider alongside OLP and the 52 week average when calculating annual holiday pay . 114. Currently Section 21 of the Act states that annual holi day pay must be the greater of OWP or the employee’s average weekly earni ngs over the last 52 weeks. In some circumstances this can result in an employee’s income reducing when they are on leave when compared to their income from directly before the leave. For example, if an employee had worked at an increased level of income d ue to, for example, a seasonal variation . The Taskforce is proposing to address this issue by introducing a new average weekly pay calculation over the last four or 13 w eeks . FBAPS leave payments 115. The process for calculating FBAPS leave payments is set out in the diagram on page 3 1 and includes the following key steps: a) Determine that the day in question is an Otherwise Working Day (see separate section on this issue) b) Determine the number of hours that would have been worked on the day in question – this sho uld be determined by the hours set out in an employment agreement or roster. If no hours of work are set out in an employment agreement or roster then the expected hours of work should be calculated by the average hours worked across all corresponding days worked in the previous 13 weeks (e.g. if the day in question is a Mon day, then an average of the hours worked on all of the Mondays worked in the previous 13 weeks ) c) Calculate Average Daily Pay for the day in question – this should be done by calculating t he hourly pay rate (based on the total earnings in the last 13 weeks divided by the total weekly hours worked in the last 13 weeks) and then multiplying the hourly rate by the number of hours that would have been worked on the day in question d) Pay the great er of the Average Daily Pay and Ordinary Leave Pay for the day in question e) If an employer uses an employment agreement or roster to calculate the hours worked on the day in question in (b) above, then weekly hours from an employment agreement or roster mus t be used in the weekly calculation to determine the hourly pay rate in (c) above. If an employer uses actual hours worked to calculate the hours 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
29. For the reasons set out below, I consider that the Taskforce’s recommendations, set out in pages 28 to 47 of the Taskforce’s report (Annex Two), should be adopted in full as the basis for a substantially amended Holidays Act.
29. In addition, the regulator must be able to assess whether an applicant meets the threshold tests for granting a license in the OSHAA Act . Without setting some requirements in regulations, the regulator m ay find it difficult to get information necessary to assess whether the applicant can meet these tests . 30. An additional consideration is whether the scope, detail and substance of the application requirements meet the objectives of the regime, particularly to grow an internationally competitive space industry. If requirements are too burdensome, this may act as a disincentive to the industry developing by imposing undue compliance costs on applicants. 31. We note that there will be no application fees for licenses initially. This will reduce the overall costs for applicants of applying under the regime. Size and magnitude of the problem 32. At this stage, the size of these problems ar e difficult to assess because of the small scale of activity affected by the requirements and the uncertain nature of application volumes. However, as activity ramps up , onerous application requirements have the potential to stifle the development of the s pace industry and / or add substantively to the costs of operating from New Zealand. For example, anecdotal evidence from discussions with overseas payload operators indicates that the costs associated with seeking professional legal advice to enable them to be satisfied that they are comply ing with the requirements of a licensing regime can add a significant compliance cost over and above time spent on the application process. Problem definition for HAV exemptions 33. Developments in technology mean that vehi cles that operate at high -altitudes can carry out similar functions as satellites. The high -altitude part of the OSHAA Act enables the government to ensure that high -altitude activities taking place from New Zealand are consistent with our national interes ts, including national security. It also ensures that technologies that perform similar functions are regulated in a consistent way. New Zealand is one of the first countries to regulate high altitude activities. This means we have not been able to base our regime on international comparators . 34. An HAV is defined broadly in the OSHAA Act as any vehicle capable of operating above the upper limit of controlled airspace . This broad definition of high altitude will mean that some current HAV users – who effectively can operate without restriction now provided they meet the requirements of the Civil Aviation Rules (Part 101) will now require a high -altitude licenc e. Some existing activity in this area is positive for New Zealand (such as weather and atmospheric monitoring). 35. In order to ensure that the regime is taking a proportionate response to licensing this activity, two aspects were included in the legislation: • As noted above the approach to licen ce conditions can be tailored to the level of risk , and • A power to exempt certain classes of vehicle from the HAV aspects of the regime is included in the OSHAA Act . 36. The problem this Regulatory Impact Statement considers is whether to exempt certain classes of vehicle. Size and magnitude of the problem 37. The size of the problem is relatively low at the current time in that there are only a handful of HAV operators that we are aware of that would be affected by the regulations. However, the 10
2Are there other specific types of business arrangements for which compliance with the Act is more difficult?
2M Language Services specialises in enabling seamless, real-time telephone and video communication across languages.
2M is an Australasian Language Service and Language Technology Provider with a proven track record of providing pre-booked and on-demand interpreting services across Australia and New Zealand to organisations to assist them to engage with Culturally and Linguistically Diverse communities.
3 1.5 Summary of sections in the Act relating to indemnit ies and insurance
3 8shrvakdix 2020 -06-03 14:04:00 vii. ensure the balance of decision -making between employers and employees when it comes to reque st for holidays and leave is appropriately calibrated
3 Active Debris Removal and On -Orbit Servicing : Operational Policy
3 Although some specific payments may not be included in particular calculations, su ch as the calculation of Ordinary Leave Pay.
3 Although some specific payments may not be included in particular calculations, su ch as the calculation of Ordinary Leave Pay. 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
3 For example, provision of flexibility around the 13-week reference period recommended for a number of calculations and providing ability to calculate hours to be assigned to a day of leave using an average over all days of work rather than specific calendar days. Stakeholders suggested that implementing these requirements may involve significant and costly payroll system changes, especially for small businesses.
3 For example, the Taskforce recommended a reference period of the ‘previous 13 weeks’ for several calculations. A literal interpretation would mean that employees would need to split pay period data to calculate back 13 weeks from when the period of leave began. The Bill, like the Act, provides for the basis of all reference periods to be complete pay periods. 6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:12:15 I N C O N F I D E N C E 4 I N C O N F I D E N C E I propose changes to simplify, reduce costs and address gaps 20 As discussed below (para 31-33), I propose to release an exposure draft of the Bill for consultation in September this year. Before I release an exposure draft , I am seeking Cabinet ’s agreement to make additional policy decisions . The proposals in this paper are intended to address some of the known issues with the previous Government’s decisions , by simplify ing obligations , improv ing workability , better supporting common practice and reduc ing implementation requirements and compliance costs for employer s. They also address some areas where decisions were previously incomplete. 21 My proposals are all broad ly align ed with the current drafting and underlying framework of the Act to enable faster progress towards the release of an exposure draft (which will enable this Government to demonstrate its commitment to resolving the issues with the Act ). Developing and testing options for changes beyond this scope would require significant additional time as end -to-end system changes would be required . 22 I am confident my proposed changes provide greater simplicity, but I am also aware that there are further opportunities for simplification within the current framework and that businesses may also call for more foundational changes to the legislation (which would require more time for policy development and drafting) . I intend to use the expos ure draft consultation document to ask targeted questions a bout alternative options in some areas, such as a simpler payment methodology for annual leave, different entitlement accrual models (such as hours -based) and pro -rata sick l eave for part -time employees , which ha ve been raised by a number of stakeholders . I intend to report back to Cabinet in December 2024 following analysis of stakeholder feedback on the exposure draft and may seek further policy decisions at th at time. 23 The proposals are grouped into three areas and summarised below , with full details and analysis provided in Appendices Two, Three and Four . Appendix One provides an overview of the full package of changes that will be included in the exposure draft. Area One : Earning , taking and paying annual leave (full details in Appendix T wo) The proposals focus on simplifying the way that employees earn and take AL . A key change is moving to a weeks -based accr ual system to simplify the end -to-end system for providing and paying AL entitlement and better support common practice. Other changes focus on reducing the extent of payroll system changes required by the new methodology for determining the use of AL entitlement and on ensuring the framework for paying A L with regular pay provide s the certainty that is currently missing from the Act. 1 Moving from a weeks -based entitlement system to a weeks -based accrual system for providing AL entitlement : employees would accrue their four -week AL entitlement continuously during employment rather than becom ing entitled to four weeks’ AL after ‘12 months’ continuous employment ’. This is similar to the approach in comparable countries .4 It would align with the way many payroll and accounting systems already account for AL entitlements and resolve issues in other areas of the AL provisions which are a key source of compliance issues.
3 Glossary of terms Annual holiday s entitlement: Also known as annual leave, this is an employee’s legal right to not less than four weeks of paid annual holidays each year after working for an e mployer for 12 months (Section s 15 to 20 of the Holidays Act 2003 (the Act )).
3 Have we accurately captured the broad range of working arrangements that can contribute to difficulties with the Act?
3 OSHAA Section 51: Minister may take into account authorisation granted in country other than New Zealand.
3 One alternative is to specify that an employee must be provided four weeks AL each 12 months and provide flexibility for employers to work out how to provide that. This would not provide certainty and carry high compliance risks. Another option w ould be to provide a formula to help employers calculate how much AL should accrue each year. This would avoid the minor discrepancy between four weeks and the actual amount a rate of 0.0768 results in (refer footnote 4) but adds complexity , administrative burden
3 Orbital Debris Mitigation: Operational Policy
3 Payloads of a size les s than 1U : Operational Policy
3 Principal Liaison Advisors established at MBIE to support survivors of migrant exploitation during the investigation of their exploitation allegation. This support includes facilitating contact with accommodation and welfare support providers, and supporting them through the visa process and any resulting court case.
3 SG Guidelines para 3.5. 4 Assessment of the public interest is an on -going obligation. It should be reassessed whenever there is any material change in the circumstances of the case (including a ny relevant developments in the law) or the defendant (such as ill health). Title: Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines Date of Issue: July 2018 Security Classification Unclassified Version: 1.1 Review ed June 2024 Approved By: Chief Legal Officer Owner: Chief Legal Officer Page 5 of 16 between prosecutors and the re levant investigator(s) to reach the right decisions in managing prosecutions, particularly when deciding to change or withdraw charges . 6.4 Evidential Test It is the responsibility of the prosecutor reviewing the file to determine whether there is evidential sufficiency for the proposed charges selected or alternatives having regard to the evidence available. To meet the evidential test, a prosecutor must be satisfied that the proposed evidence is sufficient to provide a reasonable prospect of conviction. A reasonable prospect of conviction will exist if, in relation to an identifiable person, there is credible evidence which could be given before a Court and upon which an impartial Judge or jury could reasonably be expected to be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the person has committed a criminal offence. If this first limb of the test is not met, then no charge may be laid, no matter how important o r serious the matter may be. 6.5 The Public Interest Test If the evidential test is met, the next consideration is whether the public interest requires the prosecution to proceed. It is not the case that all offences for which there is sufficient evidence mus t be prosecuted. The prosecution decision maker must exercise the discretion as to whether a prosecution is required in the public interest. There are a multitude of factors that may be considered in determining whether prosecution is in the public interes t. A non -exhaustive list of such factors is contained in the Solicitor -General’s Prosecution Guidelines . In each case where the evidential test has been met, the prosecutor will weigh the relevant public interest factors that are applicable. The prosecutor will then determine whether or not in his or her view the public interest requires prosecution. 6.6 Written adv ice following review of file by prosecutor The prosecutor may give advice on any legal issue raised by the file and will provide written advice on the outcome of the file review. If the prosecutor is not satisfied that the test for prosecution has been m et, they will provide written advice to the prosecution decision maker that a decision of ‘no prosecution’ should be made. This advice should at a minimum include: a. an outline of the facts of the case b. the elements of the offence and any relevant statutory defences c. the evidence considered by the prosecutor d. any possible issues of admissibility that have been identified , and e. the advice that there is either insufficient evidence to establish that there is a reasonable prospect of success in a prosecution and/or concern that the public interest test has not been met (with accompanying reasons). If the prosecutor is satisfied that the test for prosecution has been met, they will document and confirm this for the prosecution decision maker . 6.7 Prosecution decision makers Prosecution decisions must be made by prosecution decision makers in accordance with MBI E’s delegations framework and these procedures and guidelines. In the case of all prosecution delegations: a. the authorisation must be recorded in writing b. the delegate must comply with the Prosecution Policy and these procedures and guidelines. Title: Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines Date of Issue: July 2018 Security Classification Unclassified Version: 1.1 Review ed June 2024 Approved By: Chief Legal Officer Owner: Chief Legal Officer Page 6 of 16 It is expected that delegations for prosecution decisions will sit at tier 4 or 5 level5 unless one or more of the following escalation criteria apply: a. the legislation, or the particular provision breached, is new or untested b. there are potential issues with the exercise of search and seizure powers (whether under a search warrant or exercisin g a statutory power) c. there are human rights issues d. there are (or may be) allegations made that MBIE has acted negligently or unlawfully , or e. any other reason exists that may indicate special sensitivity. A prosecution decision maker must: a. not have had any s ignificant involvement in the preparation of the case file b. be satisfied that all relevant information has been obtained and that the file is prepared to a satisfactory standard c. have considered, and applied, the current version of the Prosecution -Guidelines . 6.8 The Decision If a prosecutor determines that the evidential test has not been met then, subject to review or escalation, a decision of ‘no prosecution’ must be made. A decision of ‘no prosecution’ does not preclude any further consideration of a case by the prosecutor, if new or additional information becomes available. If the prosecutor advises that the evidential test and the public interest test appear to be met the prosecution may proceed if the prosecution decision maker is comfortable in relation to evidential sufficiency and considers it is in the public interest to do so. In determining whether to proceed with the prosecution, the prosecution decision maker must, in conjunction with the public interest assessment under the Prosecution -Guidelines take into account as appropriate: a. MBIE’s and the business unit’s statutory objectives and enforcement priorities including sector strategies, if any b. alternatives to prosecution which may achieve compliance c. any existing or likely prosecution or other proceedings involving the defendant(s) by another business group, or government agency, and the likely outcome d. the relevant statutory timeframes and the pe riod since the matter first came to MBIE’s attention e. the obsolescence or obscurity of the law. Factors that must not be taken into account include: a. colour, race, ethnicity, sex or marital status, religious, ethical or political beliefs b. political advantage or disadvantage to the prosecuting agency or people linked to it , and c. the possible effect on the personal or professional reputation or prospects of MBIE or its staff d. any proposal for payment of money, including compensation
3 SaaS is a software licensing and delivery model that allows users to connect and use centrally hosted cloud - based applications over the internet on an on -demand, subscription basis. 4 The Companies Office also supports Crown -funded registers (meaning the Government provides revenue directly to meet costs). Fees and levies are not charged to users of these registers, and therefore are not within the scope of this review. 8 Other registers that support the New Zealand economy more broadly • Financial Service Providers (FSP) • Personal Property Securities (PPSR) • New Zealand Business Number (NZBN) • Disclose • Auditors • Insolvency Practitioners (IP) • Retirement Villages
3 The Act is based on two key principles relating to entitlements and pay. i. That entitlements are determined in relation to the work pattern at the time leave is taken. ii. That employees should not be financially disadvantaged by taking leave, that is, they should be paid (at least) what they would have earned had they worked. 6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:12:39
3 There are a small number of situations, such as where IR’s employment information is not up to date, an employee’s work pattern/earnings change between the time of application and when parental leave payments start, or an applicant has multiple employments the calculated income estimate will still only produce an estimate and applicants and/or their employers will need to check the calculations. 2324 - 2225 5 20. In a small number of cases, it might produce a lower payment rate than OWP if the applicant’s four -week average of gross taxable weekly earnings was lower than both their OWP in the week before PL payments commence and their AWI. 21. We consider that, overal l, the use of a four -week reference period aligns with the intent of including OWP in the PL payment rate methodology for applicants, providing a significantly different reference period to the 52 - week period used for the AWI calculation, and will provide a fair outcome for applicants.
3 This is the refined definition of ‘OLP’ that the previous Minister agreed to , to address ambiguities around how components such as ‘scheduled overtime’ and ‘incentive or ‘commission payments that the employee would have received if they had worked for the relevant period’ were to be included in the calculation. 4 Hourly average rate of pay is based on gross earnings in the last 13 weeks divided by total weekly hours worked , or on paid or unpaid leave in the last 13 weeks
3 broad categories of investment are highlighted for all of the 30 platforms but in the essential oils for example, the question is where is the investment required? We first paint a brief vision; New Zealand growers and producers will wake up to the incredible opportunity presented by essential oils made from unique New Zealand flora. What investment is needed? We need to invest in scaling up farming systems. We need to invest in increasing processing capability. We need to invest in developing specialised products.
3 concerned will ensure the new attendee/s have been well briefed on previous discussions and progress. 18. The parties will each ensure that their constituents/stakeholders have appropriate opportunity to have input into development of options , through the parties’ internal governance arrangements. MBIE will ensure that appropriate cross -agency structures in place for senior government officials to be kept informed of, and have input into, the wo rk of the Group. 19. MBIE will provide secretariat support to the Group and information and research that the Group identifies is required to facilitate its discussions. Rules of engagement 20. The parties agree that they will: a. work together in g ood faith, balancing the interests of all parties b. hold discussions in confidence and on a without prejudice basis c. agree any external communications at each meeting . 21. If the parties are unable to reach agreement on recommendations, the Group ’s final report will outline : a. the areas where the parties have rea ched agreed recommendations b. the areas of difference. Timing and reporting 22. The Group will report back to the Minister of Workplace Relations and Safety with their recommendations within 12 months. This timeframe will give the Group sufficient time to commission work and undertake robust testing of options. 23. The Group will also provide an interim report after six months, so that Cabinet – and the New Zealand public – can be informed about the Group’s progr ess. 24. Each party will be responsible for reporting to their constituents/stakeholders, in accordance with any messaging agreed during the Group ’s discussions and as required by their i nternal governance mechanisms. In doing so, the parties agree to honour t he confi dentiality of the Group ’s discussions.
3 payload permits were issued between 1 October and 31 December 2024 bringing the total to 121 payload permits approved to date.
3  Any other information relevant to the assessment of the person’s technical capability. This may include; o References from members of the industry; o Professional organisation memberships; and o A history of successfully completing similar activities in other jurisdictions. If there is a question regarding any specific evidence you may consider relevant please contact NZSA at: nzspaceagency@mbie.govt.nz 1.5.3 Elements where technical capability must be demonstrated. The applicant must demonstrate that they have the technical capability to conduct a ll aspects of the launch or operation of the launch facility safely. This may require that technical capability be demonstrated in areas such as ;  Design, implementation and reliability analysis of flight safety systems;  Design, implementation and reliability analysis of active orbital debris mitigation processes;  Design, construction and operation of a launch facility or launch vehicle;  Hazardous substance management;  Range safety analysis;  The production and implementation of emergency management plans; and 1.5.4 Technical capability throughout the life of the licence The technical capability demonstrated at the time of granting a licence should be retained by the licence holder throughout the life time of the licence granted under the Act. If there is a change in employment or contractual arrangements which affects this then the licence holder should notify NZSA as soon as possible. The licence holder’s technical capability should continue to reflect industry best practice over the life of the licence, such as by ensuring staff and contractors undertake continuous professional development.
3% were still on a work visa
3. Agree to endorse in full the Taskforce’s recommendations, as set out in pages 28 to 47 of the Taskforce’s report (Annex Two), as the basis for a substantially amended Holidays Act (noting also the summary of recommendations and t he proposed Government response at Annex One)
3. Alongside this leg islative ambiguity, implementation of the Holidays Act in payroll systems and associated business processes has been poor. In recent years numerous organisations around the country have had to overhaul their payroll systems to achieve compliance with the c urrent legislation. As at June 2019, around $90.4 million in remediation payments had been paid to 116,000 employees across numerous organisations – and this figure is expected to grow substantially.
3. MBIE considers that the $310.3 million per year estimate is an overestimation. There were limitations to the estimate because it was based on a testing sample that included a large overrepresentation of employees with varied and unpredictable working arrangements, and a range of other assumptions were therefore made to ‘s cale-up’ the costs to the entire workforce.
3. Promoting global trade and investment
3. Shared objectives 1) The parties’ shared objectives for this enduring agreement are to a) contribute to an increase in Māori participation and opportunity in spec trum -related industries and the digital economy ; and b) enable M āori to contribute their talent and skills to spectrum- related industries.
3. To this end, the OSHAA Act provides for six types of licences / permits being (i) launch licences, (ii) payload permits, (iii) overseas launch licences, (iv) overseas payload permits, (v) facility licences and (vi) high -altitude licences . The licensing process will be administered by the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment ( MBIE ). 4. This regulatory impact statement deals with two issues : • The application requirements for licenses and permits , and • Whether any class of vehicle should be exempted from the high -altitude vehicle (HAV) require ments of the regime. 5. The preferred options for these issues are: • A minimum list of application requirements seeking information from applicants on how they meet the threshold tests in the OSHAA Act . This is supported by a power to accept incomplete applic ations, and the existing power in the OSHAA Act to require additional information to be given post application. • A small set of exemptions from the high- altitude aspects of the regime: o balloons launched with only the following sondes : radiosondes, ozone so ndes, frost point sondes, and /or backscatter sondes , and o the payload is used for the sole purpose of measuring any combination of the following atmospheric profiles : pressure, temperature, humidity, wind speed and direction, ozone concentration, water vapo ur and aerosols (including dust, smoke and volcanic ash) 4
3. Under the Act , an employee’s entitlement to four weeks of annual leave (AL) arises after “each completed 12 months of continuous employment”. An employee may also reques t to take AL in advance of it arising, but employers have no obligation to approve the request. 4. During the issue identification phase of the 2018 Holidays Act Review , some stakeholders raised concern about the waiting period for employees to access AL entitlements . Many employers do allow employees to take AL in advance of their entitlement arising but not all employees have access to annual leave during their first 12 months of work . 5. To address this, in 2020 Cabinet accepted the Holidays Act Taskforce (the Taskforce) recommendation that employees should continue to
3. Understanding how well the building consent system is aligned with its intent
3. Unlock trade and investment
3.2 What criteria, in addition to monetary costs and benefits have been used to assess the likely impacts of the options under consideration? The two options have been assessed against the following criteria: a. It continues to promote the existing purpose of the Holidays Act 2003 Section 3 of the Act sets out the purpose of the Act which is “to promote balance between work and other aspects of employees’ lives” and to provide: a. “annual holidays to provide the opportunity for rest and relaxation” b. “public holidays for the observance of days of national, religious, or cultural significance” 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:06:16
3.3 What other options have been ruled out of scope, or not considered, and why? Only the two main annual holidays options developed and tested by the Holidays Act Taskforce are included in the options analysis. Variations from these, or other proposals not considered by the Taskforce (for example, the portability of leave between different employers), have not been co nsidered. In addition, while the estimated impacts of the Taskforce’s full recommendations are included in this analysis (section 5.3), the various options for the remaining recommendations have not been examined. This is because:  the Taskforce ’s options for annual holidays cover the main, feasible alternatives  how annual holidays are treated is of significant interest to stakeholders, with most supporting one or the other of the two main opt ions presented in this analysis  all recommendations were consid ered in -depth by the Taskforce (e.g. for the issue of what happens to annual holiday and leave entitlements when a business is sold, the Taskforce received two supporting papers from the Secretariat, considered five main options , and discussed the relative advantages and disadvantages of each option over a number of meetings before making a decision )  the recommendations were developed and negotiated between employer, employee and government representatives, and are assumed to balance the varying perspectiv es of the different groups .
3.9 million annual international visitors
30 worked on the day in question in (b) above, then actual hours worked must also be used in the weekly calculati on to determine the hourly pay rate in (c) above. 116. The Taskforce considers that the proposed FBAPS payment methodology delivers appropriate leave entitlements and payments for all employees, and can be implemented in payroll systems. It will give employers the certainty they seek that they are meeting legislative requirements. Testing undertaken on behalf of taskforce members4 was able to confirm that, in a range of scenarios, the proposed methodology minimises overpayments or underpayments that were present with other methodologies considered. Testing on this aspect was conducted using a different methodology than for other aspects of the report. For this reason the Taskforce notes that additional testing and analysis (particularly using real representative payroll data) may provide additional assurance that there are no unintended consequences of the proposal. Recommendation 1 The Taskforce recommends that leave payments should be calculated as follows:  The relevant period of annual holidays leave should be paid based on the greater of: o Ordinary Leave Pay o Average Weekly Pay for the last four or 13 weeks o Average Weekly Pay for the last 52 weeks.  Each day (or part -day) of FBAPS leave should be paid based on the greater of: o Ordinary Leave Pay o Average Daily Pay
30. Drafting was put on hold in June 2023 to allow PCO to focus on Bills that were progressing prior to the 2023 G eneral Election. The Bill remains in complete and there are several drafting and technical issues yet to be resolved. Progressing a Bill to a complete and settled state will require dedicated policy, legal and PCO resource s .
30. In cases where the calendar -day methodology is used, the employee’s average hours worked on a calendar day would only vary significantly from their average hours across all days worked when, despite not having agreed daily hours, the employee does have a discernible pattern of work whereby they work more hours on average on some calendar days than others .5 31. For FBS leave, t he averaging methodology would only be used to calculate the hours an employee would have worked on a day of leave when those hours cannot be ascertained from an employee’s employment agreement, roster, or other document or record used in the normal course of employment. 32. Due to the events -based nature of FBS leave, an employee would typically notify their employer of their intent to take it shortly before or on the day it occurs. This means that in many cases for em ployees with variable daily hours of work, their roster would have been set before they notify their employer. In these cases, their rostered hours would be used . The calendar -
30. We are available to discuss any of the proposals contained in this paper at your convenience.
31 Proposed leave payment process
31 Table 1 4: Proposed fee for financial statement filing $ (excluding GST) All applicable register s Unit Cost Proposed fee Proposed levies Proposed total charge Current charge (fee) Change in charge % change Financial statement filing 171.36 170.00 - 170.00 175.00 (5.00) (3%)
31. The Taskforce’s recommendations meet the objectives of the review that were set out in the Terms of Reference. Importantly, the recommendations will provide the certainty and clarity that both employers and employees require f rom the Holidays Act while preserving employees’ entitlements.
32 Annual holidays entitlements Issue 2 – Annual h oliday s unit of entitlements 117. One of the most significant issues with the Act is the difficulty that it poses in calculating annual holiday entitlements and payments for employees who have variations in the hours they work and/or the amount they are paid. For these employees, it can be very hard to establish what ‘a working week’ is. This can make it difficu lt to determine how much of an employees’ entitlement needs to be used for a particular period of annual holidays. 118. As noted earlier, the Taskforce considered and tested a range of options in relation to how annual holiday entitlements should be calculated and paid. The Taskforce was keen to ensure that it recommended a system that was straightforward for the majority of employees while also containing enough prescription to provide certainty for those situations where it is not clear what proportion of an annual holidays entitlement should be used for a period away from work nor how much the employee should be paid. Recommendation 2 The Taskforce recommends that annual holidays entitlements should be calculated, taken , paid and held in weeks or portions o f weeks.
32. The Taskforce’s proposals are likely to result in a small increase in the amount paid out by employers in relation to annual holidays and other forms of paid leave (more detail is provided in the ‘Financial Implications’ section of this paper). However, this additional cost must be considered in the context of the current uncertainty and amount of resources expended by employers on attempting to comply with the current Act. Employers across the New Zealand economy have faced or are still facing expensive remediation bills resulting from their inability to comply with the Act.
33 advance) . 3.5 Balances of leave in advance and leave entitlement should be treated the same. For example, when leave in advance is taken, it will result in a negative leave balance as the entitlement does no t arise until after 12 months . 121. The Taskforce believes that this approach better balances the different needs of employers and employees and provides employees the flexibility to take time off before they receive their entitlements. Issue 4 – Calculating annual leave entitlements and payments for employees 122. One of the problems with the current Act is how to determine how much of an annual leave entitlement an employee needs to use for a period of time away from work, if the employee works variable hours. 123. The Taskforce has considered this issue in detail and proposes that the following stepped methodology should be used to determine how much of an employee’s leave entitlement should be used for a period of annual leave . Step 1 – Identifying days the employee wishes to take annual holidays on (step 3 from diagram on page 31)  An employee may take annual holidays on any days that meet one of the following criteria: o the employee has worked on the corresponding calendar day within the last 13 week s, or o the day in q uestion is a day on which the employee could b e contractually obliged to work, or o the day in question is a day on which the employee could offer to work in accordance with the terms of their contract. Step 2 – Determining hours that would have been worked on each d ay of leave (step 4 from diagram on page 31 to determine value of L)  If the number of hours an employee would have worked on a specific day is set out in an employment agreement or work roster then this figure should be used. If the number of hour s an employee would have worked is not set out in an employment agreement or work roster , then an average working day for all leave purposes shou ld be determined by calculating the average daily hours the employee worked on all corresponding calendar days in the previous 13 weeks (e.g. if the employee wishes to take leave on a Monday then the average hours worked on all Mondays in the 13 -week period should be used) . This calculation will need to be carried out for each day of leave the employee wishes to ta ke. Step 3 – Determining what a week is for an employee (step 5 from diagram on page 31 to determine value of W)  If an employee’s hours of work are set out in a n employment agreement or work roster then these hours would be used to determine what a week is for the employer. If the hours of work are not set out in a n employment agreement or work roster then a week would be determined by the average number of hours worked per calendar week within the previous 13 weeks (or across the length of the shift cycle if there is a repeating shift pattern). Step 4 – Converting leave to be taken into a portion of a week (step 6 from diagram on page 31 to determine value of P)  The period of annual holiday to be taken needs to be converted into a portion of a week so it ca n be deducted from t he annual holidays entitlement:
33 advance) . 3.5 Balances of leave in advance and leave entitlement should be treated the same. For example, when leave in advance is taken, it will result in a negative leave balance as the entitlement does no t arise until after 12 months . 121. The Taskforce believes that this approach better balances the different needs of employers and employees and provides employees the flexibility to take time off before they receive their entitlements. Issue 4 – Calculating annual leave entitlements and payments for employees 122. One of the problems with the current Act is how to determine how much of an annual leave entitlement an employee needs to use for a period of time away from work, if the employee works variable hours. 123. The Taskforce has considered this issue in detail and proposes that the following stepped methodology should be used to determine how much of an employee’s leave entitlement should be used for a period of annual leave . Step 1 – Identifying days the employee wishes to take annual holidays on (step 3 from diagram on page 31)  An employee may take annual holidays on any days that meet one of the following criteria: o the employee has worked on the corresponding calendar day within the last 13 week s, or o the day in q uestion is a day on which the employee could b e contractually obliged to work, or o the day in question is a day on which the employee could offer to work in accordance with the terms of their contract. Step 2 – Determining hours that would have been worked on each d ay of leave (step 4 from diagram on page 31 to determine value of L)  If the number of hours an employee would have worked on a specific day is set out in an employment agreement or work roster then this figure should be used. If the number of hour s an employee would have worked is not set out in an employment agreement or work roster , then an average working day for all leave purposes shou ld be determined by calculating the average daily hours the employee worked on all corresponding calendar days in the previous 13 weeks (e.g. if the employee wishes to take leave on a Monday then the average hours worked on all Mondays in the 13 -week period should be used) . This calculation will need to be carried out for each day of leave the employee wishes to ta ke. Step 3 – Determining what a week is for an employee (step 5 from diagram on page 31 to determine value of W)  If an employee’s hours of work are set out in a n employment agreement or work roster then these hours would be used to determine what a week is for the employer. If the hours of work are not set out in a n employment agreement or work roster then a week would be determined by the average number of hours worked per calendar week within the previous 13 weeks (or across the length of the shift cycle if there is a repeating shift pattern). Step 4 – Converting leave to be taken into a portion of a week (step 6 from diagram on page 31 to determine value of P)  The period of annual holiday to be taken needs to be converted into a portion of a week so it ca n be deducted from t he annual holidays entitlement: 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
33% were approved through the Pacific Access Category.
33. The Taskforce’s proposals have been tested to ensure they can be implemented with a payroll system. There will be some transitional costs and investments associated with establishing a new or amended payroll system. However, once such a system is in place the ongoing costs faced by employers in relation to complying with the Holida ys Act should reduce. For organisations that have recently reconfigured their payroll systems to achieve compliance with the current Act, adapting to the Taskforce’s ‘improved status quo’ approach should involve less re -work than would a more radical overh aul of the Act. 6 8shrvakdix 2020 -06-03 14:04:00 There are other options which would be simpler in some respects but these have drawbacks and do not have consensus support 34. The Taskforce considered a number of options in the course of its review. One of these options wa s for an hours -based accrual system for annual holidays. In this type of system an employee’s leave balance would automatically accumulate in hours at a set rate (e.g. 8% of each hour) for every hour worked.
34 o For a single day of leave this should be determined by dividing the average working day in hours by the average working week in hours. This will give the portion of a week to be deducted from the leave balance. o For multiple days of leave the entire amount of leave to be taken should be calculated in hours (repeat Step 2 for each day of leave requeste d) before it is divided by the employee’s working week (the answer from Step 3 (W)) . 124. The process above sho uld be followed for all periods of annual leave requested by an employee. In many cases the answer will be straightforward but this prescriptive methodology will provide a definitive answer even in those cases where it is not obvious. This does not prevent employers and employees from agreeing and paying weeks of leave where an employee has an entitlement to leave but is in a non -work period (e.g. for employees who have periods of work followed by periods where they do not work). 125. The Taskforce also proposes that there be an audit requirement that if an employee’s actual hours were found to be 20 percent or more above their contracted hours over a 13-week period then the employee’s actual hours should be used instead. This audit requirement would be intended to act as an incentive to ensure that the employee ’s contracted hours are an accurate reflection of their actual hours of work. 126. The Taskforce also proposes a provision t o prevent an employee from being required to use more than one week’s annual holidays entitlement for a calendar week of leave. This is to avoid an unusual situation that could arise under an averaging approach where an employee with a parti cular work pattern could theoretically be expected to use more than one weeks leave in a single calen dar week. For example, if an employee wished to take leave in a week where they were scheduled to work more hours than their average weekly hours over the preceding 13 weeks then it is possible that the actual hours of leave they wish to take would be more than their average weekly hours of work. In this case , the amount of leave to be taken should be capped at one week for each calendar week. The averaging worked hours methodology set out in this section should only be used for part weeks of leave since an y full weeks of leave will be deducted in units of entire weeks. Recommendation 4 The Taskforce recommends that: 4.1 The stepped process outlined above should be followed to determine how much of an employee’s annual leave entitlement should be used for a peri od of time away from work where an employee’s days and hours of work are not set out in an employment agreement, shift roster or other document. 4.2 Where an employee’s days and hours of work are set out in an employment agreement, shift roster or other docume nt and these are an accurate reflection of the employee’s actual working pattern, these hours should be used as the basis for determining annual holiday entitlements. 4.3 An audit requirement be introduced such that if an employee’s actual hours were found to be 20% or more above their contracted hours over a 13 -week period then the employee’s actual hours should be used instead. 4.4 A provision be introduced so that an employee cannot be required to use more than one week’s annual holidays entitlement for a calend ar week of leave (the averaging worked hours methodology set out in this section should only be used for part weeks of leave) .
34 o For a single day of leave this should be determined by dividing the average working day in hours by the average working week in hours. This will give the portion of a week to be deducted from the leave balance. o For multiple days of leave the entire amount of leave to be taken should be calculated in hours (repeat Step 2 for each day of leave requeste d) before it is divided by the employee’s working week (the answer from Step 3 (W)) . 124. The process above sho uld be followed for all periods of annual leave requested by an employee. In many cases the answer will be straightforward but this prescriptive methodology will provide a definitive answer even in those cases where it is not obvious. This does not prevent employers and employees from agreeing and paying weeks of leave where an employee has an entitlement to leave but is in a non -work period (e.g. for employees who have periods of work followed by periods where they do not work). 125. The Taskforce also proposes that there be an audit requirement that if an employee’s actual hours were found to be 20 percent or more above their contracted hours over a 13-week period then the employee’s actual hours should be used instead. This audit requirement would be intended to act as an incentive to ensure that the employee ’s contracted hours are an accurate reflection of their actual hours of work. 126. The Taskforce also proposes a provision t o prevent an employee from being required to use more than one week’s annual holidays entitlement for a calendar week of leave. This is to avoid an unusual situation that could arise under an averaging approach where an employee with a parti cular work pattern could theoretically be expected to use more than one weeks leave in a single calen dar week. For example, if an employee wished to take leave in a week where they were scheduled to work more hours than their average weekly hours over the preceding 13 weeks then it is possible that the actual hours of leave they wish to take would be more than their average weekly hours of work. In this case , the amount of leave to be taken should be capped at one week for each calendar week. The averaging worked hours methodology set out in this section should only be used for part weeks of leave since an y full weeks of leave will be deducted in units of entire weeks. Recommendation 4 The Taskforce recommends that: 4.1 The stepped process outlined above should be followed to determine how much of an employee’s annual leave entitlement should be used for a peri od of time away from work where an employee’s days and hours of work are not set out in an employment agreement, shift roster or other document. 4.2 Where an employee’s days and hours of work are set out in an employment agreement, shift roster or other docume nt and these are an accurate reflection of the employee’s actual working pattern, these hours should be used as the basis for determining annual holiday entitlements. 4.3 An audit requirement be introduced such that if an employee’s actual hours were found to be 20% or more above their contracted hours over a 13 -week period then the employee’s actual hours should be used instead. 4.4 A provision be introduced so that an employee cannot be required to use more than one week’s annual holidays entitlement for a calend ar week of leave (the averaging worked hours methodology set out in this section should only be used for part weeks of leave) . 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
34% growth in the number of Study to Work visa holders
35 Issue 5 – Parental leave ‘override’ 127. The Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act 1987 includes an ‘override’ to the Holidays Act 2003 , which states that for any annual holidays an employee becomes entitled to within 12 months of beginning a period of parental leave, they will only be paid at the rate of their average weekly earnings over the last 12 months. 128. Because the employe e’s average weekly earnings during parental leave will be $0, and parental leave periods can be up to 52 weeks long, this means that some employees are entitled to be paid $0 per week for annual holidays when they return from parental leave. The employees’ average weekly earnings will only gradually increase over the following year, leaving employees disadvantaged at a time when they may most need to use their holiday entitlement. Because the vast majority of people who take parental leave in New Zealand ar e women, this can also be seen as an issue of gender equity. 129. The Taskforce noted the added cost for employers of removing the parental leave ‘override’, but felt this was outweighed by the benefits for parents and primary carers of being able to take time away from work to spend time with their new child, without being financially disadvantaged. The Taskforce also noted feedback that the provision was often misunderstood, and was difficult to input in some payroll systems, which leads to some employees havi ng the ‘override’ applied to more of their leave balance than it should have been. Recommendation 5 The Taskforce recommends that the parental leave ‘override’ in the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act 1987 should be removed to address discrimin ation against parents who take time off to care for their young children.
35. The employees’ leave balance would be held in h ours and whenever the employee wished to take annual holidays, they would simply use the appropriate number of hours from their accumulated leave balance.
36  there is no underlying pattern of work within each Review Per iod, and  there is evidence of periods without work within each Review Period. The following enabling parameters that sup port the new definition are: a. An ‘underlying pattern of work’ can be defined as: an assessment , within a specified timeframe, that time at work does not repeat in a manner possible to anticipate . b. ‘Periods without work’ can be defined as: a continuous period away from work of more than one week . c. A recurring 13-week Review Period , beginning on the first day of employment . d. If the employer and employee agree to the definition at the start of employment, the Act assumes the definition is met until the date of the first Review Period . e. On the date of the first Review Period , the employer analyses relevant data such as payroll records and work schedules and determines whether the definition has or has not been met . f. If the employer determines the definition has been m et, PAYG can continue until the next determination at the subsequent Review Period . g. If the employer determines the definition has not been met , PAYG is stopped and leave entitlements begin . In such an instance the employer is not liable for leave entitleme nts for the work done within the Review Period in question . h. From the second Review Period onwards, the employer becomes retroactively liable for leave entitlements if an objective review of relevant data indicates that the definition was no longer met but PAYG was not stopped, i.e. wilful blindness . i. If the employer and employee disagree whether the definition has or has not been met at a review , then the employee can opt out of PAYG even if the employer considers that they still meet the definition (the emp loyee cannot opt in to PAYG if the employer does not agree they meet the definition) . j. The employer or the employee can agree at any time that the definition is no longer met. In such instances, PAYG is stopped and leave entitlements begin . k. The employer’s review of the definition must be conducted in good faith . l. PAYG loading should be clearly identified as a distinct component of every pay record. The Taskforce also recommends that: 6.3 Annual holiday entitlements for those meeting the ‘intermittent and i rregular’ definition should be paid every pay period as 8 per cent of gross earnings and itemised separately on employee’s payslips. 6.4 PAYG should be optional for those employees that meet the definition. 6.5 PAYG should no longer be an option for fixe d-term employees on contracts of less than 12 months.
36% were the principal applicants and 64% were the secondary applicants.
36. This system would be simple to operate for employers and may be easier for some employees to underst and. It was favoured by many respondents to the Taskforce’s issues paper. However, it requires a fundamental change to the calculation of payment for leave. Entitlements are currently determined in relation to the work pattern at the time the leave is take n, whereas under this approach they would be based on an employee’s arrangements at the time they ‘earned’ the leave.
37 Table 2 2: Proposed Friendly Societies and Credit Union register fees to be revoked
37 potential for proble ms to arise in situations where an employee with an availability provision in their contract is on annual holidays during (or adjacent to ) a period when they are expected to be available to work , or where an employee with an availability provision in their contract is told a shift ha s become available, but is unable to work due to sickness, bereavement, or family violence . Recommendation 7 The Taskforce re commends that: 7.1 Employers’ ability to re quire employees to attend work under an availability provision should be suspended from the end of the last shift the employee works before their leave period until the start of the first shift they work on their retu rn from leave. The employee could still agree to work during this period if they wished. 7.2 It should be made explicit that as soon as an employee agrees or is required to work a day under an availability provision, the day in question should become an ‘agree d working day’ and the entitlement to sickness, bereavement and family violence leave would now apply to this shift. Annual holidays payments Issue 8 – Definition of ‘gross earnings’ 134. Although ‘gross earnings’ is defined in section 14 of the Holidays Act, there is a lack of clarity about whether certain forms of payments should be included in the calculation of annual holidays and FBAPS payments. For example, employers are not always clear whether payments such as discretionary payments, cashed up holidays and redundancy payments should be included in ‘gross earnings’, and this issue is one of the most common issues that feature in litigation related to the Act. 135. There is also no definitive position on whether the following payments should be considered as pa rt of the ‘gross earnings’ definition:  employee share benefits  insurance benefits  contractual redundancy compensation  payments that are compensatory and would not ordinarily be considered “earnings” . 136. The Taskforce wanted to provide clarity in this area to ensure that employers know what is expected of them to meet their obligations in respect of payments made in relation to Holidays Act entitlements. 137. A number of options were considered in relation to this, including considering whether definitions used in t he Income Tax Act 2007 could be used for Holidays Act purposes. Although this option appeared initially appealing, upon further investigation a number of downsides were identified such as the fact that the purposes of tax legislation and employment regulat ion are not necessarily always aligned. 138. The Taskforce considered that a simpler definition could be provided that captured the intent of the provisions and would be easier for employers to understand and comply with. 139. The Taskforce noted the impact that th is proposal could have on employers as it would mean that all commission payment and bonuses would always be included (as there would no longer be any exclusion of ‘discretionary payments’) . However, it noted that many of these payments are already include d. In addition, employers would be able to
37 potential for proble ms to arise in situations where an employee with an availability provision in their contract is on annual holidays during (or adjacent to ) a period when they are expected to be available to work , or where an employee with an availability provision in their contract is told a shift ha s become available, but is unable to work due to sickness, bereavement, or family violence . Recommendation 7 The Taskforce re commends that: 7.1 Employers’ ability to re quire employees to attend work under an availability provision should be suspended from the end of the last shift the employee works before their leave period until the start of the first shift they work on their retu rn from leave. The employee could still agree to work during this period if they wished. 7.2 It should be made explicit that as soon as an employee agrees or is required to work a day under an availability provision, the day in question should become an ‘agree d working day’ and the entitlement to sickness, bereavement and family violence leave would now apply to this shift. Annual holidays payments Issue 8 – Definition of ‘gross earnings’ 134. Although ‘gross earnings’ is defined in section 14 of the Holidays Act, there is a lack of clarity about whether certain forms of payments should be included in the calculation of annual holidays and FBAPS payments. For example, employers are not always clear whether payments such as discretionary payments, cashed up holidays and redundancy payments should be included in ‘gross earnings’, and this issue is one of the most common issues that feature in litigation related to the Act. 135. There is also no definitive position on whether the following payments should be considered as pa rt of the ‘gross earnings’ definition:  employee share benefits  insurance benefits  contractual redundancy compensation  payments that are compensatory and would not ordinarily be considered “earnings” . 136. The Taskforce wanted to provide clarity in this area to ensure that employers know what is expected of them to meet their obligations in respect of payments made in relation to Holidays Act entitlements. 137. A number of options were considered in relation to this, including considering whether definitions used in t he Income Tax Act 2007 could be used for Holidays Act purposes. Although this option appeared initially appealing, upon further investigation a number of downsides were identified such as the fact that the purposes of tax legislation and employment regulat ion are not necessarily always aligned. 138. The Taskforce considered that a simpler definition could be provided that captured the intent of the provisions and would be easier for employers to understand and comply with. 139. The Taskforce noted the impact that th is proposal could have on employers as it would mean that all commission payment and bonuses would always be included (as there would no longer be any exclusion of ‘discretionary payments’) . However, it noted that many of these payments are already include d. In addition, employers would be able to 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
37. Under an hours -based accrual system, employees whose hours of work increased over the course of a year would be disadvantaged in comparis on to the status quo. A system where the leave balance is held in weeks ‘automatically’ adjusts when an employee’s hours of work increase or decrease (i.e. an employee with two weeks of leave will still have two weeks of leave, it is just that each week wi ll now represent a higher or lower number of hours than before their hours of work changed). An hours - based accrual system does not include this ‘automatic adjustment’ and so an employee whose hours of work increase may find themselves without enough hour s of leave in their accumulated balance to take four weeks of paid leave.
38 adjust the quantum of any such ‘discretionary payments’ in light of the fact that such payments would now form part of an employee’s gross earnings. 140. The Taskforce considered smooth ing commission/incentive payments across the period that they relate to (for example, a six-monthly commission payment could be smoothed across the 26 weeks that it relates to rather than be counted as a lump sum in a 13- week average ). However, feedback from payroll industry representativ es raised concerns about the complexity that this proposal would create. In light of this feedback the Taskforce decided not to progress with this proposal. 141. Instead t he Taskforce proposes that any payments that relate to a period that falls entirely withi n a reference period (whether the reference period is four or 13 weeks), for example, monthly or quarterly commission payments , should be included in the four or 13 week average while payments that relate to longer periods (such as annual bonuses) should b e excluded from the four or 13-week average but included in the 52 - week average. 142. Where there is uncertainty over the period which generated the payment/commission a possible rule could be that the payment is excluded from the 13 -week reference period if it has a value greater than ¼ of all such payments received in the last 52 weeks. The Taskforce noted that further work may be required in relation to the treatment of these type of payments (especially if a four -week average earnings calculation was chosen instead of a 13 week average earnings calculation) . 143. The Taskforce agreed to recommend that ‘cashed up’ statutory annual holidays should be included in ‘gross earnings’ but should be excluded from the four or 13-week leave payment calculation. 144. The Taskfor ce considered the issue of redundancy compensation payments but could not come to an agreed position about whether these payments should be included in the definition of ‘gross earnings’. One alternative that was discussed was that 8 per cent of the value of any redundancy compensation payments could be included in the calculation of leave payments to be paid upon termination rather than the entire value of the redundancy compensation payments being included. The Taskforce noted the case currently before th e courts on this issue and con sidered that the outcome of this case could infor m a future decisi on about whe ther these payments should be included or excluded. Recommendation 8 8.1 The Taskforce recommends that the following definition of ‘gross earnings ’ should be used as the basis for leave payment calculations:  ‘an employee’s leave payment should reflect all cash payments received, except direct reimbursements for costs incurred’ 8.2 The Taskforce proposes that any payments that relate to a period tha t falls entirely within a reference period ( whether the reference period is four or 13 weeks), for example, monthly or quarterly commission payments should be included in the four or 13 week average while payments that relate to longer periods (such as ann ual bonuses) should be excluded from the four or 13 week average but included in the 52 week average FBAPS leave entitlements Issue 9 – FBAPS unit of entitlements 145. FBAPS entitlements are held in days. While the Taskforce consider ed the issue of the units o f entitlement to be used throughout the Act, it did not consider that there was a strong case to move away from defining FBAPS entitlements in days.
38 adjust the quantum of any such ‘discretionary payments’ in light of the fact that such payments would now form part of an employee’s gross earnings. 140. The Taskforce considered smooth ing commission/incentive payments across the period that they relate to (for example, a six-monthly commission payment could be smoothed across the 26 weeks that it relates to rather than be counted as a lump sum in a 13- week average ). However, feedback from payroll industry representativ es raised concerns about the complexity that this proposal would create. In light of this feedback the Taskforce decided not to progress with this proposal. 141. Instead t he Taskforce proposes that any payments that relate to a period that falls entirely withi n a reference period (whether the reference period is four or 13 weeks), for example, monthly or quarterly commission payments , should be included in the four or 13 week average while payments that relate to longer periods (such as annual bonuses) should b e excluded from the four or 13-week average but included in the 52 - week average. 142. Where there is uncertainty over the period which generated the payment/commission a possible rule could be that the payment is excluded from the 13 -week reference period if it has a value greater than ¼ of all such payments received in the last 52 weeks. The Taskforce noted that further work may be required in relation to the treatment of these type of payments (especially if a four -week average earnings calculation was chosen instead of a 13 week average earnings calculation) . 143. The Taskforce agreed to recommend that ‘cashed up’ statutory annual holidays should be included in ‘gross earnings’ but should be excluded from the four or 13-week leave payment calculation. 144. The Taskfor ce considered the issue of redundancy compensation payments but could not come to an agreed position about whether these payments should be included in the definition of ‘gross earnings’. One alternative that was discussed was that 8 per cent of the value of any redundancy compensation payments could be included in the calculation of leave payments to be paid upon termination rather than the entire value of the redundancy compensation payments being included. The Taskforce noted the case currently before th e courts on this issue and con sidered that the outcome of this case could infor m a future decisi on about whe ther these payments should be included or excluded. Recommendation 8 8.1 The Taskforce recommends that the following definition of ‘gross earnings ’ should be used as the basis for leave payment calculations:  ‘an employee’s leave payment should reflect all cash payments received, except direct reimbursements for costs incurred’ 8.2 The Taskforce proposes that any payments that relate to a period tha t falls entirely within a reference period ( whether the reference period is four or 13 weeks), for example, monthly or quarterly commission payments should be included in the four or 13 week average while payments that relate to longer periods (such as ann ual bonuses) should be excluded from the four or 13 week average but included in the 52 week average FBAPS leave entitlements Issue 9 – FBAPS unit of entitlements 145. FBAPS entitlements are held in days. While the Taskforce consider ed the issue of the units o f entitlement to be used throughout the Act, it did not consider that there was a strong case to move away from defining FBAPS entitlements in days. 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
38. The Taskforce did not recommend such a system because of concerns about the disadvantages it could have for some employees and the departure from the principle that annual holidays entitlements are based on the work pattern at the time the leave is taken.
39 Recommendation 9 The Taskforce recommends that FBAPS entitlements should continue to be held in days.
39% of the 1391 people were women, which is a great number to see. I loved being there and meeting everyone and I wish I had more time to spend with these people.
3D printing a new way of life for amputees
3D printing and additive manufacture
3Have we accurately captured the broad range of working arrangements that can contribute to difficulties with the Act?
4 1.6 Approach to exercising the discretion to require insurance and/ or indemnity The Act provides the responsible Minister with flexibility to require insurance or an indemnity . NZSA will apply the following policy: Payloads: • Generally small payloads that meet internationally accepted standards for orbital debris mitigation (supported by an ODMP that meets New Zealand’s requirements) will not require indemnity and insurance requi rements. • Indemnity and in surance requirements for a payload permit is assessed on a case by case basis. • The Minister may impose further condi tions on any licence or permit as they see fit.
4 Active Debris Removal and On -Orbit Servicing : Operational Policy
4 Are there other specific types of working arrangement s which raise particular difficulties in terms of complianc e with the Act ?
4 As note d in the September 2022 final report back to Cabinet on the All of Government Payroll Programme to improve government payroll systems, many government agencies’ payroll systems are bespoke and aging, and already struggling to adapt to ongoing changes [GOV -22-MIN-0036] . 6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:12:39
4 Employees that have variable working arran gements and complex remuneration structures are most likely to receive an increase in leave payments. They are most likely to work in the ‘health care and social assistance’, ‘accommodation and food services’ and ‘public administration and safety’ sectors. Approximately 34 percent of the ‘health care and social assistance’ workforce and 100 per cent of the ‘public administration and safety’ workforce are employed in the public service, compared to the public service’s proportion of the total New Zealand workforce of 16 per cent. It is therefore likely that a greater proportion of the marginal fiscal impacts of the Taskforce’s proposals will be apportioned to the Government than the sector’s 16 per cent of the workforce would suggest. Confidential advice to Government
4 For example, in the UK a worker’s 5.6-week annual leave entitlement begins to build up as soon as they start their job. A ‘regular worker’ receives one -twelfth of their leave in each month. In Australia an employee (who is not a ‘casual’ employee) accumulates four weeks of paid annual leave for each year of service with th e employer. An employee’s entitlement to annual leave accumulates continuously based on the number of ordinary hours they work. 6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:12:15 I N C O N F I D E N C E 5 I N C O N F I D E N C E 2 Removing the requirement to allow employees to take AL in advance during a closedown period : This reduces a liability risk for employers should the employee ’s employment end as leave in advance is above AL an employee has ‘earned’ . 3 Simplifying and reducing the implementation requirements of the new methodology for d etermining the use of AL entitlement: I propose removing the ‘audit requirement ’ for employees with actual hours that differ from guaranteed hours which would have a high compliance burde n and result in uncertainty for employers and employees. I also propose replacing the requirement to calculate average daily hours of work based on specific calendar days to reduce the extent of payroll system changes required. 4 Simplifying the framework for paying AL as a regular part of an employee’s pay (pay -as-you-go (PAYG)): I seek Cabinet’s agreement to design objective criteria for using PAYG that do not require the use of judgement and will provide the certainty that is currently lacking . I also propose lengthening the period for reviewing the use of PAYG in order to reduce administrative burden and compliance costs.
4 Independence 4.1 The Solicitor -General’s Prosecution Guidelines state at 4.1 that: “The universally central tenet of a prosecution s ystem under the rule of law in a democratic society is the independence of the prosecutor from persons or agencies that are not properly part of the prosecution decision -making process.” Title: Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines Date of Issue: July 2018 Security Classification Unclassified Version: 1.1 Review ed June 2024 Approved By: Chief Legal Officer Owner: Chief Legal Officer Page 3 of 16 4.2 The Prosecution Policy provides that MBIE will ensure that prosec ution decisions are taken independently. The processes and guidelines in this document are intended to protect the independence of the MBIE prosecution decision maker. 4.3 Any matters that arise outside of the Prosecution Policy and these procedure and guidelines that may compromise or be seen as compromising independence m ust be raised with the Chief Legal Officer . 4.4 MBIE business units may develop enforcement strategies setting out business unit priorities and guiding deployment of investigations resources. Prosecution d ecision makers should be aware of these strategies and take them into consideration , but prosecution decisions must be made independently by the responsible decision maker with the benefit of expert legal advice. 4.5 Where a regulatory framework splits regulatory role s between MBIE and an external body,1 it is appropriate to consult the external body on an enforcement strategy, but not on individual prosecution decisions. 4.6 Internal and external comment and discussion on prosecution matters (including reporting to SLT, Ministers or comment to the media) should recognise this independence both before and during prosecutions. Formal reports to Ministers and/or SLT should generally occur only once charges have been laid or withdrawn, in accordance with the “no surprises” obligations of officials in respect of matters that are likely to be controversial or the subject of public debate.2 4.7 Public comment on investigations and prosecutions must follow section 11 of this document (media comment). 5 Conflict of Interest 5.1 All staf f involved in prosecutions or potential prosecutions must act lawfully, fairly, promptly, and free of any actual, potential or perceived conflict of interest. This applies when making decisions or contributing in any way to any MBIE prosecution or other litigation arising out of or related to prosecution action that may reasonably be contemplated. 5.2 Any conflict of interest by an MBIE staff member (whether actual , potential or perceived) must be disclosed immediately to the relevant manager in accordance with the Declarations of Interest Policy , Prosecution Policy and appropriate legal advice sought from the prosecutor or the Manager Legal Services – Litigati on. In the case of disagreement as to the existence of a conflict of interest or the way in which it should be managed, the Chief Legal Officer ’s decision will be final. 5.3 It is the responsibility of the business unit manager to: a. record, in accordance with the Declarations of Interest Procedure , the nature of the conflict, the d ate of disclosure, its impact on the prosecution if any and any advice given as to its management; b. assess whether it creates a risk (other than ordinary litigation risk) that needs to be included in a risk register; and
4 Orbital Debris Mitigation: Operational Policy
4 Survey of Working Life, 2018 5 Blumenfeld, Ryall & Kiely (2019). Employment Ag reements: Bargaining Trends and Employment Law Update 2018/2019 . 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:06:16
4 Testing undertaken by Dragonfly on behalf of CTU.
4 Testing undertaken by Dragonfly on behalf of CTU. 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
4 The Review team commissioned Professor Steven Freeland to provide expert advice for our review in relation to high -altitude activities.
4 The research finds that our strength in post -farmgate bioprocessing systems (manufacturing) is highly flexible and not directly tied to the land and so it is easily adaptable to the manufacture of high -value products (as distinct from commodities) , drivi ng diversification and growth in our export economy. Thus, utilising our existing bioresources – including waste streams – into their highest value applications is found to be easier than developing all new crops and sources of biomaterials. In the longer -term , New Zealand might look to develop new production systems, examples being seaweed, microalgae, industrial hemp, canola, and eucalyptus, most of which are currently being trialled by market players. The key issue with new production syste ms is whether they can scale quickly and become competitive. Some, like seaweed, will require significant R&D around growing and harvesting systems, to develop efficiency and scale economies. The success of others, like canola, is dependent on whether New Zealand can be internationally competitive with major offshore producers. Ideally , in the future , New Zealand can utilise its significant forestry resources and potentially new high -rotation crops such as eucalyptus to manufacture biochemicals, bioplastics and bioenergy at a scale to substantially replace similar fossil fuel -derive d products. Currently the economics of doing this is challenging. In addition, New Zealand would have to develop a whole value chain around these bio -industries to make them work. This includes funding of innovation infrastructures, such as an open -access pilot -scale biorefinery to enable proof of concept, technical information acquisition and pilot scale production. Work to date on costs of establishing such a facility, includin g potential reve nue streams, indicates that reasonably substantial Government capital investment and ongoing part funding of operations would be required. This is consistent with the experience of similar facilities in other countries. Māori business are well placed to pi oneer and benefit from emerging ‘new ’ bioeconomy products and industries, given existing investment, knowledge, and skills in land -based industries , particularly forestry. For Māori, innovation will be key for: minimising the use of fossil fuels through th e development of alternative products; increasing value added by exporting finished and consumer -ready goods rather than raw inputs; and increasing the production of biomass by shifting land -use to higher yielding crops. More generally, our research found that the Māori economy can act as a catalyst for shift to more sustainable and circular use of resources, particularly through land utilisation opportunities and the role of local place -anchored enterprises. New Zealand needs new skill sets and capabiliti es in firms and institutions to transition to more value -added and branded export business. New Zealand has highly developed capabilities along the whole value chain as a low -cost commodity food exporter, based on 120 years of public and private investment. Over the last twenty years there has been growing industry investment in developing more c omplex added - value products, often consumer products, with exports now valued at $8.3 billion as indicated above. 5 This growth has often been led by start -ups and new entrants (eg Chinese investment in infant formula and petfood) rather than by the large incumbents. A key reason for this is that the commodity business requires skills and capabilities based around scale, efficiency, and quality, while the added -value business requires a whole additional set of skills and capabilities that the commodity playe rs (and New Zealand generally) lack. The additional capabilities include the ability to manage complex value chains, constant product and packaging innovation, access to pilot facilities , new technologies and machinery, market insights , access to capital, and skills in sales and brand development . Some of the capabilities required have been put in place, such as the New Zealand Food Innovation Network (NZFIN), the Biores ource Processing Alliance (focusing on waste streams), and the Food and Beverage Inform ation Project that ran from 2011 to 2021. Achieving the Government’s export target through value rather than volume will likely require scaling and expanding these programmes, in li ne with the significant investment in food being made by competitor countri es Australia, Singapore, Denmark, Ireland. Upgrading of capital equipment to enable the production of added value products is also an important opportunity to embed practices of reducing waste and circularity . Source s: Emerging and future platforms in New Zealand’s bioeconomy Barriers, enablers and approaches for a more circular economy
4 This is a high - level assessment based on officials’ preferred option. Confidential advice to Government 2324- 2225 6 transferred from one employer to the other but in reality they have entered a new employment relationship with the incoming employer. 27. Our view is that in these situations, the outgoing employer is legally required to pay out untaken annual leave and alternative holiday entitlements under the Holidays Act when the employee’s employment with them comes to an end, and the employee’s leave entitlements res et with the incoming employer. The outgoing employer is not required to pay out untaken family violence leave, bereavement leave or sick leave (FBS leave) entitlements when employment ends, but may choose to do so. 28. However, in practice the outgoing and incoming employers often allow employees to transfer all or part of their leave entitlements (including annual leave and alternative holidays) and come to an agreement about who takes on the liability for that leave. This outcome is beneficial for both employers and employees. It provides employers flexibility in relation to business arrangements and liabilities, and means employees do not always have to wait to become entitled to paid time away from work because their leave entitlements have been reset by the incoming employer. However, it is technically a breach of the Holidays Act. 29. Because of this , there is currently no legal framework to support common practice when it comes to apportioning liability between them and transferring the employee information needed to calculate employees’ leave entitlements and pay to the incoming employer . This causes confusion and issues with the calculation and payment of leave following restruct uring . 30. Our view is that the new legislation should legitimise the common practice. However, the Taskforce’s recommendation (which Cabinet accepted in 2020) seeks to go further than this and require employers to offer employees the choice as to whether they have their annual leave and alternative holidays paid out or transferred if they are transferring to the incoming employer. Giving effect to the Taskforce’s recommendation would be complex 31. It is unclear whether the Taskforce’s recommendation was intended to apply to the types of employees specified in Schedule 1A of the ERA. Part 6A of the ERA already sets out that these types of employees must be offered choice to transfer employment to the incoming employer, and if they do choose to transfer, their leave entitlements must be automatically transferred . This explicitly overrides the Holidays Act requirement that the outgoing employer must pay out untaken annual leave and alternative holiday entitlements. 32. The Part 6A provisions are intended to account for these employees’ lack of bargaining power and greater risk of losing their job or having their terms and conditions undermined. We consider it strikes an appropriate balance between the Emplo yment Relations and Standards regulatory system ’s objectives of flexibility, certainty and worker protection, and recommend the situation for specified employees remains unchanged. 33. It is also unclear how the Taskforce’s recommendation was intended to be im plemented in standard restructuring situations. For types of employees not specified in Schedule 1A, the decision by employers to offer employees the opportunity to transfer their employment in a restructuring situation is a contractual choice. Part 6A of the ERA requires employment agreements to contain an Employ ee Protection Provision (EPP) that sets out the process employers will follow in restructuring situations , however this process can be decided by parties to the employment agreement. The EPP must a lso 2324- 2225 7 include the matters employers will negotiate regarding the affected employee’s employment, including whether they will have the choice to transfer employment on the same terms and conditions. 34. A literal approach to operationalising the Taskforce’s recommendation would mean that employers would be required to offer employees a choice about whether to have their leave entitlements transferred or paid out by the outgoing employer, as a downstream decision of something they are voluntarily agreeing to. Imposing this statutory constraint on employers’ contractual arrangements could discourage the incoming employer from offering employees the opportunity to transfer their employment. 35. Due to the additional policy work required, work to implement this recommendation was put on hold and it is not currently included in the Bill. During the election period we have progressed work to develop options for addressing the underlying issues the recommendation was intended to address. 36. We are seeking your agreement to include an adjustment to the current Cabinet decision accepting the Taskforce’s recommendation in your May Cabinet paper. This will enable your preferred option to be included in the exposure draft of the Bill, providing the opportunity to test it with stakeholders for practicality and any unintended consequences or further complexities we may not have considered. Options to address the issues identified in restructuring situations defined in Part 6A of the ERA 37. We have identified f ive options to clarify how leave entitlements should be treated in restructuring situations (as defined in Part 6A of the ERA) where employees who are not specified in Schedule 1A of the ERA transfer employment to the incoming employer. These are summarised in Table 1 below and more detail is included in Annex One. Table 1 – options for addressing issues related to the treatment of leave entitlements in restructuring situations defined in Part 6A of the ERA Option Description 1 No legislative change but improved MBI E guidance (there currently is none) to improve understanding of the current legal status quo to pay out and res et annual leave and alternative holiday entitlements. This would require rescinding the Cabinet decision to accept the Taskforce’s recommendation. 2 Improved MBIE guidance (same as option one) and legislative amendments to clarify the legal status quo. This would also require rescinding the current Cabinet decision. 3 Legislative change that requires employers to automatically transfer employees’ annual leave and alternative holiday and FBS leave entitlements if they negotiate for the employee to be offered the choice to transfer employment and the employee chooses to do so. This would require a minor adjustment/clarification to the current Cabinet decision, but it would be difficult to draft a legislative ame ndment to achieve this. 4 Legislative change that requires employers to offer employees the choice to transfer all or part of their annual leave and alternative holiday and FBS leave entitlements if they negotiate for the employee to be offered the choice to transfer employment and the employee chooses to do so. This would require a minor adjustment/clarification to the current Cabinet decision, but it would be difficult to draft a legislative amendment to achieve this. 2324- 2225 8 5 Recommended option Legislative change that requires the treatment of leave entitlements to be included in Employee Protection Provisions as a matter that the outgoing employer will negotiate with the incoming employer. The specific matters are set out in detail in A ppendix One and include whether the incoming employer will recognise all or part of the employee’s annual leave and alternative holiday entitlements not taken at the date of transfer (instead of the outgoing employer paying them out in accordance with the Holidays Act provisions). They also include whether an employee will be provided a choice in the matter, or it will be automatic. This option would require a more significant adjustment to the current Cabinet decision as, unlike options three and four, it departs from the Taskforce’s recommendation to require employers to provide a choice to employees. 38. We have assessed the options against the core objectives of the Employment Relations and Standards regulatory system: • Regulatory flexibility : provides scope for parties to adopt a range of approaches to meet legal obligations relating to the treatment of leave entitlements in the event of restructuring. • Worker protection: enables employers to give employees whose employment is being transferred the option to retain all or part of their leave entitlements to take paid time away from work. • Certainty: provides clarity about the treatment of leave entitlements in restructuring situations. We recommend option five because we consider it strikes the most appropriate balance between the objectives 39. Option five provides the flexibility for employers to adopt a range of approaches that best suit their specific business circumstances, which the other options do not provide. It also provides employers the ability to negotiate for all or part of employees’ leave entitlements to be transferred and, where this is negotiated, whether employees are offered a choice in the matter. It would override the Holidays Act requirement that annual leave and alternative holiday entitlements must always be paid out at the end of employment, and provide a legal framework for employers to follow. 40. Option five reflects common practice (unlike the other options) and would provide certainty regarding the legal obligations in restructuring situations. It would also require Employee Protection Provision s in employees’ employment agreements to include the apportionment of liability and the transfer of relevant employee inform ation as matters employers will negotiate. 41. In terms of worker protection, option five does not ensure that employees will always have their leave entitlements transferred or that they will have a choice in the matter, but it does provide the ability for this to happen. It includes a safeguard for situations where an employee transfers employment on a lower rate of pay, ensuring that the payment they receive for transferred leave entitlement is not less than what it would have been if it were paid out and res et at the time of the restructuring. 42. Option five also minimises the risk of distorting the negotiation process between employers. The mandatory nature of the requirement to provide employees the choice to transfer their leave entitlements in options three and four may discourage the incoming employer from offering employees the opportunity to transfer their employment if large leave liabilities were involved. 2324- 2225 9 Appendix One: Options for addressing issues related to the treatment of leave entitlements in standard restructuring situations Implementation option Certainty Regulatory flexibility Worker protection 1. No legislative change but improved MBIE guidance (there currently is none) to improve understanding of the current legal status quo to pay out and reset annual leave and alternative holiday entitlements. Requires rescinding the Cabinet decision to accept the Taskforce’s recommendation.  Legisla tion does not provide clarity but guidance will provide greater certainty about legal requirements. × The common practice of including transfer of leave entitlements as part of negotiations between employers remains non- compliant and this would be clarified in guidance.
4 allowances, incentive or commission payments that the employee would have received if they had worked for the relevant period.
4 areas of specialisation:
4 government agencies have released a Long-term Insights Briefing about preparing all young people for satisfying and rewarding working lives. A summary of the briefing is also available.
4 years after certification
4. Agree to refine the Taskforce’s recommendations on two issues where the recommendations were incomplete, by specifying that:
4. Build an aerospace-capable workforce
4. Innovation, technology and science
4. Problems in the building consent system
4. The estimate also assumes that all employers currently provide minimum leave entitlements to their employees. In practice however, many employers already provide entitlements at least equal to the increases the
4. To help address the root causes of these issues, Cabinet agreed in May 2018 to establish a Taskforce to review the Act and suggest recommendations for change [CAB -18-MIN-0250 refers]. The tripartite group was comprised of government, union and business rep resentatives, and was chaired by Professor Gordon Anderson, an employment law specialist from Victoria University. The Taskforce was provided with approximately a year to provide its final report.
4.1. the reference period for the ‘short -run’ average weekly earnings calculation used f or calculating annual holiday payments should be 13 weeks
4.2. any commission or incentive payments where it is unclear what period of time the payments were ‘earned’ over should only be included in the 52 week average payment calculation
4.2.4 Using the ‘pay -as-you- go’ provision inappropriately 69. Section 28 allows an employer to regularly pay annual holiday pay of 8 per cent of the employee’s gross earnings in lieu of providing 4 weeks of annual holidays (commonly referred to as ‘pay -as-you-go’(PAYG)) . 70. However, an employer is only able to do so if the employee is on a fixed -term agreement for less than 12 months, or works on a basis that is “so inter mittent or irregular that it is impracticable for the employer to provide the employee with 4 weeks’ annual holidays.” 71. It is not always clear to employers when this clause applies, and what “impracticable” means – especially if an employee requests or agre es to have holiday pay included in their regular pay. There is no statutory definition of a ‘casual’ working arrangement, even though this term might be used in employment agreements. 72. Some employees may start off as a casual worker and be eligible for PAYG but over time a pattern of work might emerge. If this happens then the employer should switch to providing annual holidays. Correctly using the PAYG provision requires the employers to be in regular contact with their payroll, and to make adjustments shou ld circumstances change. 73. An additional liability can arise in situations where an employee may incorrectly be paid PAYG for 12 months or more as, after 12 months the employee becomes entitled to annual holidays in line with Section 16. In this instance, a n employer has not met their obligation by providing four weeks of annual holidays. Providing an additional 8 per cent (eve n if identified and agreed as holiday pay), does not absolve the employer from the requirement to provid e the four weeks entitlement if the employee has worked for the employer for longer than 12 months . 10 Do you agree with the description of the issues relating to annual holidays here and in Annex Two? If not, why not?
40 a minimum amount of a quarter of a day.
40% for domestic productions.
40. For reasons of clarity a nd simplicity, as well as providing an appropriate balance between minimising cost to employers while protecting entitlements for employees, I propose that the ‘short -run’ reference period should be 13 weeks and that any commission or incentive payments wh ere it is unclear what period of time the payments were ‘earned’ over should only be included in the 52 week average payment calculation.
40. The objectives of the OSHAA Act are to: • facilitate the development of a space industry and provide for its safe and sec ure operation • implement certain international obligations of New Zealand relating to space activities and space technology, including those found in the Outer Space Treaty , 1967 • manage any potential or actual liability that may arise from the space industry • establish a system for the regulation of space activities and certain high -altitude activities , and • preserve New Zealand’s national security and national interests . 41. The design of the regulations should not hinder these objectives. 42. In addition, the specif ic objectives we are assessing the options in this Regulatory Impact Statement against are: For the application requirements • Enabling the regulator and applicants to efficiently work through the application process and meet the requirements of the regime • Ensuring the compliance costs of applying for licenses are appropriate , and maintain the international competitiveness of the regime, and • Enable the license application process to evolve over time as volumes increase and the regulator develops expertise and best practice . For the issue of high-a ltitude exemptions • Managing national interest and national security risks associated with certain h igh- altitude activities 11
41 155. The Taskforce also discussed the ‘Mondayisation’ issue whereby those employees who regularly work Mondays receive more paid public holidays as a result of their wor king patterns than other employees who do not regularly work on Mondays. 156. The Taskforce considered establishing a ‘pro -rata’ public holidays entitlement based on the average number of days per week worked. This would ensure that all employees who worked th e same number of days per week received the same entitlement to paid public holidays regardless of which particular days of the week they worked. Under this approach , every employee ’s public holidays entitlement would be based on the number of days worked per week as set out below: No. days worked per week Public holidays employee is eligible for 5,6 or 7 11 4 9 3 7 2 5 1 3 157. The ‘pro-rata’ entitlement would be calculated at the end of the year and the employee would then receive any additional enti tlement in the form of alternative holidays (for example, if an employee worked four days a week and throughout the year only received seven paid public holidays then at the end of the year they would receive an entitlement of two alternative holidays). No employee would be disadvantaged under the proposal so if, as a result of their working pattern, an employee had received more paid public holidays than their ‘pro-rata’ entitlement suggests they should have received no action would be taken. 158. While estab lishing a ‘pro -rata’ public holidays entitlement would address the ‘Mondayisation’ issue, it would add complexity and cost for employers. The Taskforce was unable to reach agreement about recommending the establishment of such an entitlement. Recommendati on 13 The Taskforce recommends that a day should be considered an Otherwise Working Day for an employee for FBAPS purposes if:  the employee was expected to work on the day in question according to a work pattern that has previously been agreed between the employee and employer (for example, a regular shift pattern that is set out in an employment agreement) , or  the employee has worked on 50% or more of the corresponding days in either the previous 4 weeks or the previous 13 weeks.
41 Appendix One: Summary of questions
41% growth in visitor arrivals in the last 5 years
42 Appendix Two: Summary of proposed fees and levies Proposed Companies Office fees and levies set to recover $42 million expenditure
42 Recommendation 14 The Taskforce recommends that section 69(2)(a) of the Act , regarding peo ple on whose death the employee may take 3 days of bereavement leave, should be extended to include:  stepfamily  family -by-marriage not already included (siblings -in-law and children -in-law)  cultural family groups (e.g. whāngai relationships)  aunts, uncles, nieces and nephews  miscarriage (this proposal is currently being progressed via a private members bill). The Taskforce notes that the definition included in the Family Violence Act 2018 app ears to cover all of these groups and individuals, but may need to be updated to specifically include miscarriage: family member, in relation to a person, means — (a) any other person who is or has been related to the person — (i) by blood; or (ii) by or through marriage, a civil union, or a de facto relationship; or (iii) by adoption: (b) any other person who is a member of the person’s whānau or other culturally recognised family group ’
42. I propose to mitigate this risk by emphasising the support that the Taskforce recommendations received from both business and union representatives on the Taskforce, and h ighlighting the improvements that the proposed system will provide. I will particularly emphasise that these proposals will allow employers to shift from a highly uncertain and risky regulatory environment where large remediation payments are the norm, to one where they will be able to have confidence they are meeting the regulatory requirements.
43 Other proposed changes Issue 16 – Establishing a 12th public holiday 163. The Taskforce also discussed the case for establishing a public holiday for Ma tariki. The Māori calendar (the Maramataka) begins in June when the Matariki star cluster reappears in the sky. Recently, some politicians, members of the public, and media commentators have argued that a new public holiday should be created to recognise Matariki, which would celebrate the ‘Māori New Year’ and honour Māoritanga (traditions and cultu re). New Zealand currently has 11 public holidays, and Waitangi Day is the only one of these that honours Māori as tangata whenua. Recommendation 16 The Taskforc e was unable to reach a consensus view in relation to establishing an additional public holiday. The Taskforce noted that Matariki could be marked either by establishing an additional public holiday or by transferring an existing public holiday to recognis e Matariki. The Taskforce noted the case for Matariki to be recognised with a public holiday but did not feel it was within its remit to make recommendations about whether Matariki should be marked with a public holiday, and if so how this should be achiev ed (i.e. by establishing an additional public holiday or transferring an existing public holiday to Matariki).
43. The complexity of the existing and proposed legislation means that further policy decisions will likely be required during the drafting process (for example, to connect the various elements of the Taskforce’s proposals, and reconcile them with provisions o n which the Taskforce did not make recommendations). I therefore request authorisation to make any changes and decisions during drafting in line with the Taskforce’s recommendations.
44 be reset by agreement) . This would no longer be necessary, due to the Taskforce’s previous recommendation that employees should be able to take holidays in advance of entitlem ent, on a ‘pro-rata’ basis. 17.4 Employees should be able to take holidays in advance beyond their ‘pro-rata’ entitlement in the event of a ‘customary’ closedown, but employers may not compel employees to do this. 17.5 A minimum notice period of 14 days should be in troduced for ‘agreed’ additional closedowns (the Act is currently silent on notice periods for these). 17.6 The agreement between employer and employee that additional closedowns will occur must be in writing.
44. I note that the Better Rules approach will be used to develop the detail ed policy and implementation specifications that will be necessary for this next phase of work. Better Rules is a collaboration between multiple government agencies, including the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE), Inland Revenue and t he Parliamentary Counsel Office. The Better Rules approach involves creating a clear concept model, decision trees and rules statements that can then be translated into both written legislation and computer code. This should result in legislation that is clear and, importantly, workable for computerised payroll systems. I note that this approach has been used successfully by Inland Revenue, which also needs to develop rules with payroll systems in mind.
44. In recent years a number of issues have been identified with the Holidays Act 2003 that have made it difficult to implement in practice. In addition to a range of specific issues relating to specific parts of the Act (for example, determining entitlemen ts and payments for annual holidays), there are also some more fundamental, cross -cutting issues related to the design of the Act. 45. This section outlines these fundamental, cross -cutting issues as well as highlighting some of the more significant issues th at relate to specific parts of the Act. A more detailed list of the specific issues the Taskforce is aware of in relation to particular parts of the Act is included in Annex 2. 46. The Taskforce would appreciate feedback on:  whether the issues outlined in thi s section and in Annex 2 are captured correctly from your perspective  whether you have encountered any other issues related to implementing the Act that are not included in this paper and if so, what these are. Some issues relate to all aspects of the Act 4.1 47. There are a number of issues that apply across the whole Act rather than to one specific section or other. These relate to the design of the Act itself and are the cause of many of the problems employers, employees and professional service providers (inclu ding payroll providers) face in working with the Act. These issues, which are discussed below, are:  the lack of specific prescription in the Act  the complexity of the Act  the lack of clarity in relation to specific terms included in the Act. 4.1.1 The lack of prescription in the Act can make it hard to implement, particularly if agreement between employer and employee is not reached 48. The Act is intentionally not prescriptive in its design , to allow different ways for employers and employees to comply based on the particular circumstances of their workforce and individual situations. 49. In situations in which it is not clear how the entitlement is to be provided, the Act does not provide any prescriptio n. Instead a number of judgements are required based on the specific facts of an employee’s working and remuneration arrangements. Often the agreement of the employee about how leave entitlements should be provided for their particular circumstance is requ ired. In practice, this agreement of the employee may not always be sought. 50. Instead, either the employer makes a determination, or the payroll system relies on available information which may never have been , or is no longer, accurate . The requirements f or employers to use judgement or reach agreements with their employees are difficult to systematise and can involve significant resources, especially for large employers with many staff. Payroll systems are often configured around assumptions or agreements which later shift.
45 Appendix Three: Forecast annual volumes by register to determine unit costs Register Service Annual volumes Companies register Company incorporation 58,466 Annual return 558,350 Annual return – API 83,432 Name approval 95,663 Amalgamation 379 Restoration 1,171 Personal Property Securities register Registration/renewal financing statement 85,000 Registration/renewal financing statement – API 460,000 Basic search – internet 570,000 Basic search – API 3,200,000 Financial statement s Financial statement filing 3,533 Disclose register Disclose: Managed fund offers Lodgement of product disclosure statement (per fund) 70 Annual confirmation to managed fund (per fund) 1,060 Disclose: Other financial products Lodgement of product disclosure statement (per PDS) 20 Annual confirmation other financial products (per PDS) 94 Disclose: Managed investment schemes Register managed investment scheme or governing document 6 File scheme annual report 473 Disclose: overseas offers Offer under Asia region funds passport (per fund) 1 Financial Service Providers register Registration 1,602 Annual renewal 12,449 Retirement Villages register Registration application 12 Annual return (< 34 units) 189 Annual return (35 – 84 units) 122 Annual return (> 85 units) 227 Incorporated Societies register Registration 721 Annual return 18,271 Restoration 250
45 records for longer than six years in cases where an issue has been raised in good faith. Issue 20 – Payslips 171. There is currently no legal requiremen t for employers to provide payslips to employees in New Zealand. Although employees have a legal right to ask their employer for their wages, time and leave records, this information could be made more transparent and accessible for employees. 172. The Taskfor ce believes it is important that employees have regular access to information regarding their leave entitlements, and that payslips create the opportunity for this to be issued to employees on a consistent basis. Payslips increase transparency over pay and allow employees to better understand and track their leave entitlements. Recommendation 20 The Taskforce recommends that employers should be required to provide payslips to employees i n every pay period. Payslips could be in a digital or physical format, but employees should be able to request that their payslip be provided in a specific format. While noting that the precise design and format of payslips will require further work, the Taskforce recommends that payslips should include the type of informatio n outlined in the table below. Proposed information to be included in payslips Format Payslips should be in electronic form or hard copy General data  Employer name  Employee name  Date which payslip was made  Date of start of employment  Number of hours wor ked each day and pay for those hours  Days or portion of days worked over a calendar week  Gross amount  Net amount  Specifics of all deductions from gross amount  Types of pay (e.g. regular, overtime, or a combination, PAYG)  Inputs and methodologies, as appli cable, used to calculate general data Leave entitlements  Date on which entitlement to annual holidays begin  Date on which entitlement to FBAPS leave begin  Current entitlement to annual holidays expressed in weeks or portion of weeks  Current entitlement to family violence, sick leave and alternative holidays (if applicable) expressed in days or portions of days  Balance of annual holidays leave expressed in weeks or portion of weeks  Balance of family violence, sick leave and alternative holidays (if applicab le) entitlements expressed in days or portions of days  Inputs and methodologies, as applicable, used to calculate leave entitlements Leave transactions  Payment for annual leave or FBAPS leave, if applicable  Payment for cashed -out annual holidays, if appli cable
45 records for longer than six years in cases where an issue has been raised in good faith. Issue 20 – Payslips 171. There is currently no legal requiremen t for employers to provide payslips to employees in New Zealand. Although employees have a legal right to ask their employer for their wages, time and leave records, this information could be made more transparent and accessible for employees. 172. The Taskfor ce believes it is important that employees have regular access to information regarding their leave entitlements, and that payslips create the opportunity for this to be issued to employees on a consistent basis. Payslips increase transparency over pay and allow employees to better understand and track their leave entitlements. Recommendation 20 The Taskforce recommends that employers should be required to provide payslips to employees i n every pay period. Payslips could be in a digital or physical format, but employees should be able to request that their payslip be provided in a specific format. While noting that the precise design and format of payslips will require further work, the Taskforce recommends that payslips should include the type of informatio n outlined in the table below. Proposed information to be included in payslips Format Payslips should be in electronic form or hard copy General data  Employer name  Employee name  Date which payslip was made  Date of start of employment  Number of hours wor ked each day and pay for those hours  Days or portion of days worked over a calendar week  Gross amount  Net amount  Specifics of all deductions from gross amount  Types of pay (e.g. regular, overtime, or a combination, PAYG)  Inputs and methodologies, as appli cable, used to calculate general data Leave entitlements  Date on which entitlement to annual holidays begin  Date on which entitlement to FBAPS leave begin  Current entitlement to annual holidays expressed in weeks or portion of weeks  Current entitlement to family violence, sick leave and alternative holidays (if applicable) expressed in days or portions of days  Balance of annual holidays leave expressed in weeks or portion of weeks  Balance of family violence, sick leave and alternative holidays (if applicab le) entitlements expressed in days or portions of days  Inputs and methodologies, as applicable, used to calculate leave entitlements Leave transactions  Payment for annual leave or FBAPS leave, if applicable  Payment for cashed -out annual holidays, if appli cable 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
45. The previous Minister also agreed that employees who would become eligible after three months would receive their full ten days of minimum sick leave entitlement upon becoming eligible. This solution took into account feedback from our working group that aligning the accumulation points for these two groups of employees would help simplify the accumulation process and making it easier to understand and implement in payroll systems. They had raised concerns that the gradual accumulation process Cabinet agreed to would add complexity because it involved multiple points at which different groups employees would become entitled to different portions of the minimum sick leave entitlement. You may wish to reconsider the accumulation profile 46. We recommend seeking Cabinet approval for the accumulation profile. However , you may wish to reconsider the accumulation profile and propose a different approach . 47. You may wish to lengthen the timeframe over which sick leave accumulates, considering the impact on employers of providing the minimum sick leave entitlement earlier than the current requirement of after six months of employment. For example, rather than accumulating over the first three months of employment, sick leave could accumulate over the first six months of employment. 48. There are a range of accumulation profiles you can choose depending on whether you placed greater importance on lengthening the timeframe over which this group of employees’ sick leave accumulates, or on reducing the complexity and related costs to employers. 49. We recommend a profile for the exposure draft that lengthens the accumulation over six months. To respond to the stakeholder feedback about complexity, we propose that there are fewer accumulation points. Our proposal is two days entitlement on day one, four more days after three months and the remaining four days at the six -month point (2,4,4). This is a minimum and an employer (as many do now) could choose a simpler profile that is above it, for example by providing the full day entitlement from day one. 50. Accumulating sick leave over six months has the downside that to retain parity, employees who meet the eligibility criteria (the hours test) after three months, would also need to have an accumulation profile. These workers would receive six days when they become eligible and then the additional four days when they reach six months. Stakeholders are likely to raise further concerns about the provision of sick leave 51. A longer timeframe over which sick leave accumulates in the first year of employment would go some way to address employer concerns about the costs of providing sick leave to employees from the first day of employment for eligible employees . 52. Despite this, a new requirement to give eligible employees the ability to take some sick leave from d ay one is likely to reinforce stakeholder concerns about the overall fairness of sick leave entitlements and the costs and risks to businesses. Several employers raised concerns in their submissions on the Holidays (Increasing Sick Leave) Amendment Bill in 2021 regarding the
46 Register Service Annual volumes Limited Partnerships register Registration 381 Annual return 4,667 Friendly Societies register/Credit Unions register/Building Societies register Registration 6 Annual return 72 Insolvency Practitioners register Licence registration 11 Annual confirmation 110 Auditors register Registration/renewal of a licence 32 Annual confirmation 186 Levies CO levy 724,376 NZBN levy 724,376 IP levy 700,247
46  Payment for PAYG, itemised separately, if applicable  Inputs and methodologies, as applicable, used to calculate leave transactions Quarterly review of employees ’ working arrangement (for PAYG, sick, bereavement and family violence leave eligibility purposes)  Date on which quarterly review carried out  Result of quarterly review for PAYG eligibility (if applicable) and any changes to entitlements resulting from the review  Result of quarterly review for sick, bereavement and family violence leave eligib ility and any changes to entitlements resulting from the review Termination  Reference to termination pay, if applicable  Reference to leave pay, if applicable  Inputs and methodologies, as applicable, used to calculate termination Corrections  Notation of any corrections to previous payslips, including references to payslip number, methodologies an d data that have been corrected
46. One recommendation made by the Taskforce was for further work to be undertaken on the design of compliance and enforcement mechanisms to suppor t any revised Act. While this work is yet to be completed, my initial view is that any changes to the existing mechanisms (such as the functions and powers of labour inspectors) are likely to be minor. I will seek Cabinet policy approvals if further work l eads me to conclude that a significant departure from existing employment legislation is necessary.
47 Appendix Four : Summary of fees to be revoked and other minor changes Description of service Current fee – $ (GST exclusive ) Reason for revoking Companies register Photocopy made by the public 0.17 Service no longer provided. Photocopy made by the Registrar 0.89 Service no longer provided. For any other electronic search 4.44 This fee was established for web -based searching for finance statements under the Personal Property Securities Act 1999. The service is no longer provided. Manual search of the Companies register 8.89 Service no longer provided because Companies register is an online register only. Personal Property Securities register Verification statement by post 8.89 Service no longer provided. Certified copy of finance statement 22.22 Service no longer provided. This fee was similarly revoked in 2017 for the Companies register. Limited Partnerships register Certified copy of finance statement 22.22 Service no longer provided Friendly Societies and Credit Unions register Copy per page under section 5(4) of the Friendly Societies and Credit Unions (Fees) Regulations 1992 . 0.27 Service no longer provided . Annul return filed more than three months after close of the financial year (Part 1 and Part 2 of the Friendly Societies and Credit Unions (Fees) Regulations 1992 ). 17.78 An overdue fee is not applied to other annual return filings for other registers . On application for confirmation of an amalgamation, transfer of engagements, or conversion into a company under section 86(1) of the Act 355.56 This service has not been provided in 25 years, as the Registrar has not received an application under this section and it is anticipated that this service can be managed with no additional fee. For filing an instrument of dissolution under section 94 (as applied by section 140(1)) of the Act. 311.11 Following an amendment to the Act in 2019, credit unions cannot be removed from the register by filing an instrument of dissolution. For filing, under section 82(3) (as applied by section 135(4) of the Act, a copy of a special resolution passed for the purpose of amalgamation or transfer of engagements. 133.33 The description of the fee in regulations no longer matches the changes made to the Act in 2019.
47 Recommendation 2 2 The Taskfo rce recommends that employers and employees have the ability to agree to arrangements that are different to those in the Act providing that it can be demonstrated that these arrangements provide the employee with leave entitlements that, at a minimum, meet the standards set out in the Act .
47% were approved through the Partner resident visa category.
47. The Treasury, State Services Commission, Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet (Policy Advisory Group), Ministry of Education, Ministr y of Health, Ministry of Justice, Ministry of Social Development, Office for Disability Issues, Ministry for Women, Ministry for Pacific Peoples, Inland Revenue, Oranga Tamariki – Ministry for Children, Department of Internal Affairs and Te Puni Kokiri wer e consulted on this paper.
48 Annex 1: Holidays Act 2003 Review – Terms of Reference Purpose 1. The purpose of the Holidays Act Working Group (the Group) is to make recommendations to Government for a clear and transparent set of rules for providing entitlements to, and payment for, holidays and leave that can be readily implemented in a payroll system and is applicable to an increasingly diverse range of working and pay arrangements. 2. It is important that a customer -focused approach is taken to this r eview to ensure that recommendations are readily implementable by employers and their payroll providers. Background 3. There is widespread non -compliance with the Holidays Act 2003 (the Act) and it is generally accepted that this is due both to issues with th e implementation of the legislation in payroll systems and the business processes that support these, and issues with the legislation itself. 4. The Act works well for a standard, five day, 40 hour week, but can be difficult to apply to more diverse working a rrangements and complex remuneration packages. This is primarily because the Act is based on two key principles relating to entitlements and pay: a. that entitlements are determined in relation to the work pattern at the time the leave is taken b. that employees should not be financially disadvantaged by taking leave, that is, they should be paid (at least) what they would have earned had they worked. 5. In these situations, the Act relies heavily on employers making judgements as to how the provisions of the Act a pply to the specific circumstances of the individual employees, and in some cases agreement with the employee is required. In some cases, these may need to happen each time leave is requested. 6. The result is an Act that does not provide certainty to employe rs and employees, is difficult for employees and employers to understand and interpret, is hard to systematise in a payroll system, and can incur relatively high compliance costs for employers. Objectives 7. The Group is required to develop, test and make rec ommendations to the Government on policy options for the provision of, and payment for, holiday and leave entitlements that: a. continue to promote the existing purpose of the Holidays Act 2003 b. provide clarity and certainty for employers and employees so that employees receive their correct entitlements c. are simpler than the current Act in relation to provisions of, and payment for, entitlements to holidays and leave d. are readily implementable in a payroll system e. minimise compliance costs for employers f. minimise perverse incentives on employers and employees g. ensure the balance of decision -making between employers and employees when it comes to requests for holidays and leave is appropriately calibrated h. are readily applicable to the full range of working and remune ration arrangements in the labour market both now and in the future i. aim to protect overall entitlements for employees.
48 On application for confirmation of an amalgamation or transfer under section 136(1) of the Act 355.56 The service has not been provided in 25 years. There are only three remaining credit unions, therefore it is anticipated that this service can be managed with no additional fee.
48% of these were approved through the Dependent Child resident visa category.
49 Scope and parameters 8. The Review will retain the purpose of the current Act (in section 3) and (at least) the current levels of entitleme nts (such as four weeks’ annual holidays, five days’ sick leave). 9. The Group will consider: a. options to improve both the provision of, and payment for, entitlements that meet the objectives set out in paragraph 7, and: i. where trade -offs between competing obj ectives are required, will be explicit about how these are made ii. may include consideration of the place of the standard five day, 40 hour, working week in the Act b. any other matters relating to the Act that it sees fit. This may include holidays and leave entitlements modified by other Acts (such as the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act 1987 ). 10. The principles set out in paragraph 4 may also be reconsidered, but options must aim to preserve the intent of these as far as possible. 11. The Group will no t, however, consider the complex issue of remediation of historical underpayments of holiday and leave pay. Membership and Process 12. The Group will consist representatives from MBIE, the State Services Commission and Inland Revenue, along with three to four members each representing workers, employers, led by an independent Chair with the power to commission work. 13. The Group will be chaired by Gordon Anderson, a law professor at Victoria University. The Chair is an independent/neutral party in the Group discus sions, whose purpose is to facilitate the parties to reach jointly agreed recommendations to Government. 14. The Group is expected to consult widely to get a comprehensive understanding of the issues with the Act, and draw on international examples of holiday s and leave legislation where appropriate. 15. The Group is also expected to work closely with technical experts such as payroll providers, business rules specialists, and service design and delivery specialists to assist with the design and testing of policy options. 16. The Group is required to support their recommendations with quantitative analysis of different options, tested with bona fide payroll data, to ensure that those options are readily implementable and adverse consequences have been identified. 17. The p arties agree that consistency of attendees will be important for the Group to achieve its objectives, and will ensure that representatives will not be changed unless this is unavoidable. If any change in representatives is required, the party concerned wil l ensure the new attendee/s have been well briefed on previous discussions and progress. 18. The parties will each ensure that their constituents/stakeholders have appropriate opportunity to have input into development of options, through the parties’ internal governance arrangements. MBIE will ensure that appropriate cross -agency structures in place for senior government officials to be kept informed of, and have input into, the work of the Group. 19. MBIE will provide secretariat support to the Group and informat ion and research that the Group identifies is required to facilitate its discussions.
49. The Department of Internal Affairs, on behalf of the All -of-government Payroll Programme working group, relayed concerns that the Taskforce’s recomm endations do not provide enough certainty, transparency and practicality, and will impose significant costs on employers when updating their payroll systems and complying with new requirements. The working group recommends that further detailed design work , including more comprehensive payroll testing, is conducted before decisions are made by Cabinet regarding legislative change.
4Are there other specific types of working arrangements which raise particular difficulties in terms of compliance with the Act?
5 (MBIE, 2021) MBIE Strategic Intentions 2021 -2025 https://www.mbie.govt.nz/assets/strategic -intentions - 2021 -2025.pdf 6 MBIE's purpose is to ‘grow New Zealand for all’ https://www.mbie.govt.nz/about/who -we-are/ 11 Table 1: Companies Office actual or forecast expenditure and revenue FY 201 8/19 – 2024/25 ($000) Financial year Actual 2018/19 Actual 2019/20 Actual 2020/21 Actual 2021/22 Actual 2022/23 Actual 2023/24 Forecast 2024/25 Total revenue by register 29,470 28,746 32,627 30,706 32,227 32,641 32,521 Companies, limited partnerships, NZBN 16,839 16,405 18,740 18,067 19,133 19,264 19,371 Incorporated societies 116 101 116 143 175 168 107 Friendly societies, credit unions, building societies 6 5 5 4 5 4 4 Retirement villages 280 284 347 256 350 398 350 Disclose 989 943 1,051 994 910 1,056 968 Financial service providers 1,472 1,724 1,978 1,404 1,422 1,414 1,382 PPSR 9,003 8,519 9,095 8,593 8,937 8,965 8,904 Auditors and insolvency practitioners 30 45 571 709 714 724 723 Financial reporting filing 511 446 543 486 531 514 542 Other 224 274 181 50 50 134 170 Total fees/levies funded expenditure 30,696 35,461 34,063 33,398 38,324 35,52 7 35,692 Personnel 7,246 8,691 7,830 7,289 7,442 7,785 7,617 Other operating 6,766 7,597 6,607 3,759 8,221 6,982 8,288 Depreciation 3,753 4,772 4,848 5,312 4,592 3,046 2,450 Capital charge 678 1,165 787 1,030 728 681 627 MBIE functional support 12,253 13,236 13,991 16,008 17,341 17,033 16,710 Surplus/(Deficit) (1,226) (6,715) (1,436) (2,692) (6,097 ) (2,886 ) (3,171) Memorandum account balance as of 30 June 18,017 11,302 9,866 7,174 1,077 (1,809) (4,980) Monitoring revenue and expenditure: tracking the memorandum account The Companies Office uses the memorandum account to track the annual revenue and expenditure associated with providing services to users of each of its registers that are not funded by the Crown. The memorandum account records the annual surplus or deficit to provide a cumulative balance over time. It is monitor ed for when changes will be required to the cost recovery settings (the structure and amount of fees and levies) and to ensure that recurring surpluses or deficits are kept to a minimum. This practic e is in -line with Treasury and OAG cost recovery guidance. The three -to- five-year frequency of reviews of cost recovery and resulting adjustments to fees and levies provides entities with a level of certainty that fee and levy amounts will not fluctuate annually and allows them to plan accordingly for any changes. Fluctuations between surplus and deficit are expected over time (shown year -to-year in Table 1). Many of the Companies Office services are demand driven , and economic shocks such as the recent COVID -19 pandemic, can impact the demand for service across the Companies Office registers. In 2017, the memorandum account showed an accumulated surplus of $19.243 million. Therefore , the 12 2017 fees and levy review resulted in some fees being set below cost recovery to reduce this surplus over time. A s at 30 June 202 4, the memorandum account balance reached a deficit of $1.8 09 million and forecast to continue to decline by approximately $3.0 million per year unless charges are updated. Why the current level of fees cannot be maintained Without any change to fees, MBIE would need to either seek a capital injection or fund the deficit from its cash reserves. Funding from cash reserves is not sustainable overtime, as it would compromise MBIE’s capital investment plan. A capital injection wo uld need to be considered by Cabinet in the wider context of investment across New Zealand. Proposed additional expenditure The review of the cost model has identified a level of savings to cover increase d costs in other areas (eg savings in personnel reprioritised to offset other types of expenditure). The proposed fees and levies in this document incorporate a proposed increase of $6.0 million to the Companies Office budget above this reprioritisation exercise. This increase would meet new cost pressures, improve the types of operational services provided and maintain the integrity of the Companies Office registry regime within the next three -to-five years. The increased budget would be applied to the four categories of cost pressures below. IT Infrastructure upgrades to ensure continued functionality and security ($3.0 million) $3.0 million will be applied to required IT spending to cover the cost of essential security and maintenance upgrades to the existing IT systems (primarily supporting the Disclose register) . Costs include appropriate resourcing to meet current IT standards, improving the efficiency of registration and renewal processes for customers and enhancing cyber security measures to minimise the risk of cyber -attacks. Improvements to IT systems will s implify registration and payment, as well as the statutory declarat ion and disclosure processes, which will improve the overall processing of online applications and renewals. MBIE IT functional support ($ 0.250 million) $0.250 million will be applied to additional MBIE IT functional support costs for IT platforms shared across MBIE. MBIE has recently integrated several IT platforms shared by the Companies Office registry systems to the cloud (including migration of register websites). The integrations and migrations aim to eliminate security and continuity risks and improve technical resilience but have resulted in an additional operating expenditure to the registers managed by the C ompanies Office. Expanding education and awareness activities ($0. 750 million) $0.750 million will be applied to working with existing incorporated societies to help them understand their new obligations under the Incorporated Societies Act 2022 (which came into effect on 5 October 2023) over the next three years. Work will also focus on improving how incorporated societies interact with the registry system.
5 8shrvakdix 2020 -06-03 14:04:00 $0 per week for annual holidays if used immediat ely following their return to work, and any such leave used in that first year after return will be paid at a lower rate than their ordinary weekly pay. The value of the leave increases during the year, and is at the normal rate 12 months after they have r eturned from parental leave.
5 As the question of whether to pursue cost -recovery is a policy matter, and not within the scope of the statutory revi ew, further discussions with Rocket Lab on this subject were not progressed as part of this work .
5 Conclusions and recommendations
5 Do you have anything further to add about the role of the Labour Inspectorate as a regulator of the Holidays Act?
5 For example, an employee might work six to eight hours most Saturdays they work, but four hours most Sundays they work. In this case, the average hours the employee has worked across all days could be lower than their usual Saturday hours, but higher than their usual Sunday hours. If an employee has very variable daily hours of work or works a similar number of hours on any calendar day of work then there will be little difference.
5 Foreword 8 October 2019
5 Or tier 6 operational managers in large branches. Title: Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines Date of Issue: July 2018 Security Classification Unclassified Version: 1.1 Review ed June 2024 Approved By: Chief Legal Officer Owner: Chief Legal Officer Page 7 of 16 e. the existence of a diversion po licy.6 If the prosecution decision maker and the prosecutor do not agree on evidential sufficiency, the prosecution decision maker may seek a review through contacting the Legal Manager, Litigation or relevant Crown Solicitor’s office. If the prosecution decision maker and the prosecutor do not agree whether or not it is in the public interest to take or continue a prosecution, the decision maker must consult the Manager Legal Services –Litigation and if disagreement remains, the matter should be referred to the General Manager of the branch in which the business unit sits (if the General Manager is not the prosecution decision maker) and the Chief Legal Officer in accordance with the Legal Services Policy .7 If the Chief Legal Officer and the General Manager cannot agree on the public interest, a decision to commence or continue the prosecution may only be made by the General Manager or relevant Deputy Secretary after obtaining legal advice from the Crown Law Office or the relevant Crown Solicitor. The decision must be based only on information contained in the case file. 6.9 Coordinated Enforcement and Prosecution Decision -Making It is not uncommon that more than one MBIE business unit, or more than one government agency may investigate a particular matter, in circumstances where prosecution or other enforcement activity by any of those business units or agencies could result. Wherever possible, MBIE business units must work collaboratively with each other or other agencies to ensure that investigations are carried out in the most expedient and robust manner. For example, in some cases it may be possible for business units or agencies to share information, such as witness statements, to ensure that witnesses are not subjected to multiple interviews by different people. Care will al ways be required however to ensure that the sharing of information does not compromise the investigation(s). When determining whether to prosecute, the prosecution decision maker should consider any existing or likely prosecution or other proceedings invol ving the defendant by another MBIE business unit, or other government agency, and the likely outcome. In the case of a decision not to prosecute on public interest grounds, where there is non -compliance with legislation administered by another agency, the decision maker should consider referring that matter to that other agency for decision to ensure a coordinated government response, prior to any formal response being issued. It is the responsibility of the investigator and the relevant business unit manag er to consult with the Police or other agency responsible for enforcing the legislation concerned before a decision to prosecute is made, and to provide reasonable notification as to progress and outcome of any prosecution commenced. Those consultations wi ll ensure that good information is available in relation to the public interest in prosecuting the person and may, at MBIE’s discretion, impact on its decision to bring a charge(s), or the timing of any charges being brought (e.g. to await a prosecution decision in respect of more serious offending).
5 Purpose of this document To develop this document MBIE reviewed the current cost of services delivered by the Companies Office, including forecast cost pressures and the fees and levies it currently charges to recover those costs. The objectives of the review are to ensure that: • the Companies Office is funded sustainably while ensuring users meet an appropriate portion of the cost given the benefit they receive • the Companies Office can resource all the functions it is expected to deliver. This document outlines the proposed changes to fees and levies and key questions to help MBIE understand the impact on your business or organisation. Proposed timeline for review Due date Action 2 May 2025 Release of discussion document 13 June 2025 Deadline for public submissions to MBIE August 2025 Report to relevant Ministers on submissions and final proposals for changes to fees and levies September 2025 Seek approval from Cabinet for proposed changes December 2025 Fees and levies implemented Guidance considered in this review This review takes into account existing guidance on setting charges, including the Treasury’s Guidelines for Setting Charges in the Public Sector and the Office of the Auditor General’s (OAG) Good practice guide: Setting and administering fees and levies for cost recovery . The principles of cost recovery set out in the guidance are reflected in the options for adjusting fees and levies, where relevant. How to use this document The remainder of this document is structured in five sections with three appendices. Section Content Page Overview Section 1 Summary of the review and proposals 6 Section 2 Companies Office funding 10 Section 3 The basis for setting fees and levies 16 Proposed options for Companies Office fees and levies Section 4 Current and proposed levies 20 Section 5 Proposed fees and total charges for all registers 26 Appendix One Summary of questions 41 Appendix Two Summary of proposed fees and levies 42 Appendix Three Forecast annual volumes by register to determine unit costs 45 Appendix Four Summary of fees to be revoked and other minor changes 47 6 Overview Section 1: Summary of the review and proposals The Companies Office performs an important role The Companies Office administers a portfolio of ‘economy -supporting’ registers established by various Acts of Parliament. The Acts and associated regulations set out the obligations of businesses or entities who are registered and the functions of each Reg istrar. Regulations prescribe the fees and levies to be paid by users to recover the costs of operating the registers. The Companies Office helps ensure that those ‘doing business’ in New Zealand are registered and accountable to the law, and that information about them is publicly available. It oversees New Zealand's core business information through the New Zealand Busin ess Number (NZBN) register. Its functions are critical in building trust and confidence in our economy, helping to make New Zealand a place where doing business is easy, transparent , and fair. Why do fees and levies need to be reviewed? Most services (like filing an annual return or registering an entity) provided by the Companies Office are funded on a ‘user -pays’ basis through two types of third -party charges: • Fees – that are collected to fund specific services ( eg filing an annual return on a particular register); and • Levies – that are collected and allocated to broader functions where they provide benefits to a ‘club’ of users ( eg for regulatory oversight by the Companies Office).1 Treasury and OAG guidance recommends that when the g overnment sets fees and levies, it should do so at a rate that is no more than the amount necessary to recover costs incurred in providing the services to which they relate . However, because costs can change, it is important that fees and levies are regularly reviewed to check that they are covering costs and not resulting in over -recovery or under -recovery of costs and any fee adjustments made. The Companies Office reviews fees and levies every three to five years to ensure an appropriate amount of cost recovery. In the last review in 2017, fees were set to recover less than the cost required to operate, to account for a level of over -recovery in previous years. This fluctuation in cost recovery is monito red through the Commerce and Consumer Affairs: Registration and Provision of Statutory Information memorandum account (the memorandum account).2 Costs pressures considered in this review The modelling of costs and the proposed fees and levies in this review have considered the current budget for the Companies Office registry services in the context of the shift of costs between registers from the overall position in 2017. The review f ound that the general inflationary pressures
5 areas of specialisation:
5 day per week deliveries to PO Box and Private Bags, except where they received less than 5 day per week deliveries as at 30 June 2013.
5 day per week delivery to all delivery points which received the rural delivery service as at 30 June 2013, except for those points which had a lower delivery frequency
5 segments of this industry have distinct customers with distinct needs and, as a result, different firms targeting them. These are the classic weightlifting muscle building when they think of sports nutrition. Then you get into the products targeting professional sports people who are often worried about banned substances and being substance free. Then there are gym members and what we call weekend warriors, then there are the people who are more the aspirational or healthy life stylers and then there are people who are looking for meal replacement and weight management type products. Each of the 5 segments have distinct customers with distinct needs.
5% of the value of credits successfully secured or rebooked on behalf of consumers (excluding GST).
5. Accelerate aerospace innovation
5. Discussion of underlying causes
5. I received the Taskforce’s final report in October 2019 (a ttached as Annex Two). Unlike past reviews of the Act, the Taskforce was able to make unanimous recommendations on a comprehensive package of changes to improve the current legislation. The Taskforce:
5. Infrastructure for growth
5. Legislation to establish permanent Māori spectrum entity 1) Both parties agree that legislation will likely be required to establish and give effect to a permanent Māori Spectrum Entity. 2) The Crown intends to propose draft legislation to establish a permanent Māori S pectrum Entity for introduction to the House of Representat ives. 3) The draft legislation that will be proposed for introduction to the House of Representatives: a. Must comply with the drafting standards and conventions of the Parliamentary Counsel Office for Government Bills, as well as the requirements of the Leg islature under Standing orders, Speakers’ Rulings, and conventions; and b. Must be in a form that is satisfactory to the MSWG and MBIE; and c. Must be consistent with this MOU. 4) MBIE and the MSWG will work together from the date of this MOU to support the passage of any draft bill through Parliament. 5) Until the permanent entity is established, the Interim Māori Spectrum Commission will undertake the responsibilities of the intended Mā ori Spectrum Entity.
5. Note that some of the Holidays Act Taskforce recommendations are likely to receive negative feedback but this risk can be partly mitigated by a communications strategy that focuses on the improvements that the Taskforce’s recommendations will provide
5.1 million annual visitors by 2025
5.2 Pathways to Open Access
5.2.1 Acceptable loci for Green OA deposit
5.2.2 Acceptable versions for Green OA deposit
5.2.4 Timing of Open Access
5.2.5 Metadata requirements
5.3 Open Access to Research Data
5.3 What other impacts is this approach likely to have? Option One – Impacts of the Taskforce’s recommendations for the entitlement and payment for annual holidays The Taskforce proposals reflect an improvement on the current annual holidays provisions. They provide clear rules for how to calculate a ‘week’, clarify what payments are to be included in payment calculations, and give employees the ability to take leave in advance on a pro -rata basis (at present, employees can only take annual h olidays in advance at an employer’s discretion ). The entitlements and payment calculations also minimise incentives for employees to take holidays on particular days (i.e. payments and deductions are well -calibrated) or for employers to arrange rosters in certain ways. However, the annual holidays recommendations increase the number of payment calculations from two (greater of Ordinary Weekly Pay and average weekly earnings over the last 12 months) to three, and do not fully address concerns regarding compl exity and being easily understood by regulated parties . Payroll testing and our analysis indicates that :  The annual holidays proposals under Option One result in higher annual holiday payments (on average) than the status quo . Results show that around 34 p er cent of employees were better off and annual holidays payments Total Monetised Cost Approx. $312.9 million per year for Option One Non-monetised costs Expected benefits of proposed approach compared to taking no action Regulated parties (employers and employees) Employer s will have g reater clarity and certainty, be better able to systematise rules, and reduce the likelihood and impact of remediation projects. E mployees more likely to receive their correct entitlements and payments and have earlier and greater access to some forms of leave. Medium Regulators (Labour Inspectorate) Greater clarity and prescription should make it easier to identify non-compliance . Low Wider government Some benefits as regulated parties. Medium Total Monetised Benefit Non-monetised benefits Medium 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:06:16
5.4 Reporting requirements
50 Rules of engagement 20. The parties agree that they will: a. work together in good faith, balancing the interests of all parties b. hold discussions in confidence and on a with out prejudice basis c. agree any external communications at each meeting. 21. If the parties are unable to reach agreement on recommendations, the Group’s final report will outline: a. the areas where the parties have reached agreed recommendations b. the areas of diff erence. Timing and reporting 22. The Group will report back to the Minister of Workplace Relations and Safety with their recommendations within 12 months. This timeframe will give the Group sufficient time to commission work and undertake robust testing of op tions. 23. The Group will also provide an interim report after six months, so that Cabinet – and the New Zealand public – can be informed about the Group’s progress. 24. Each party will be responsible for reporting to their constituents/stakeholders, in accordance with any messaging agreed during the Group’s discussions and as required by their internal governance mechanisms. In doing so, the parties agree to honour the confidentiality of the Group’s discussions.
50. I disagree with the Payroll Programme working group’s recommendation that further testing should occur. The model proposed by t he Taskforce was subject to robust testing by an external provider with expertise in payroll matters and using bona fide payroll data across a wide range of working arrangements. The Taskforce’s model represents a unanimous recommendation by employer, work er and government representatives. I am confident that the Taskforce considered the need for certainty, transparency and practicality and that their recommendations are a significant improvement on and more readily implementable than the status quo. Any ch ange will have implementation costs. I plan to minimise these through the Better Rules approach discussed in paragraphs 43 -46 above.
51 Annex 2: Entitlements under the Holidays Act 2003 and proposed system Entitlement Holidays Act 2003 Proposed system Annual holidays  Employees are entitled to four weeks’ annual holidays each year when they have worked for their employer for 12 months.  Employees are entitled to four weeks’ annual holidays each year when they have worked for their employer for 12 months.  Employees have the ability to take annual holidays in their first 12 months up to the amount they would be eligible for on a ‘pro- rata’ basis. Sick leave  Employees are entitled to five days’ paid sick leave a year.  Employees are entitled to sick leave after six months ’ continuous employment, or if they have worked for the employer for six months for an average of 10 hours per week and at least one hour in every week or 40 hours in every mon th.  Sick leave is explicitly considered in units of days.  Employees are entitled to five days’ paid sick leave a year.  Eligible employees are entitled to one day of sick leave from their first day of employment, with an additional day per month of employme nt until the full entitlement of five days is reached after four months.  Employees are eligible for sick leave if they have agreed hours and an expectation of continuous employment. If not, they are eligible after 13 weeks if they have worked on average at least 10 hours a week, or after six months continuous employment.  Employees have the ability to take sick leave in units of less than a day on a proportionate basis for time and pay with a minimum amount of a quarter of a day. Family violence leave  Emplo yees are entitled to 10 days’ paid family violence leave a year.  Employees are entitled to family violence leave after six months continuous employment, or if they have worked for the employer for six months for an average of 10 hours per week and at least one hour in every week or 40 hours in every month.  Family violence leave is explicitly  Employees are entitled to 10 days’ paid family violence leave a year.  Eligible employees are entitled to family violence leave from the first day of employment.  Employees are eligible for family violence leave if they have agreed hours and an expectation of continuous employment. If not, they are eligible after 13 weeks if they have worked on average at
51 Annex 2: Entitlements under the Holidays Act 2003 and proposed system Entitlement Holidays Act 2003 Proposed system Annual holidays  Employees are entitled to four weeks’ annual holidays each year when they have worked for their employer for 12 months.  Employees are entitled to four weeks’ annual holidays each year when they have worked for their employer for 12 months.  Employees have the ability to take annual holidays in their first 12 months up to the amount they would be eligible for on a ‘pro- rata’ basis. Sick leave  Employees are entitled to five days’ paid sick leave a year.  Employees are entitled to sick leave after six months ’ continuous employment, or if they have worked for the employer for six months for an average of 10 hours per week and at least one hour in every week or 40 hours in every mon th.  Sick leave is explicitly considered in units of days.  Employees are entitled to five days’ paid sick leave a year.  Eligible employees are entitled to one day of sick leave from their first day of employment, with an additional day per month of employme nt until the full entitlement of five days is reached after four months.  Employees are eligible for sick leave if they have agreed hours and an expectation of continuous employment. If not, they are eligible after 13 weeks if they have worked on average at least 10 hours a week, or after six months continuous employment.  Employees have the ability to take sick leave in units of less than a day on a proportionate basis for time and pay with a minimum amount of a quarter of a day. Family violence leave  Emplo yees are entitled to 10 days’ paid family violence leave a year.  Employees are entitled to family violence leave after six months continuous employment, or if they have worked for the employer for six months for an average of 10 hours per week and at least one hour in every week or 40 hours in every month.  Family violence leave is explicitly  Employees are entitled to 10 days’ paid family violence leave a year.  Eligible employees are entitled to family violence leave from the first day of employment.  Employees are eligible for family violence leave if they have agreed hours and an expectation of continuous employment. If not, they are eligible after 13 weeks if they have worked on average at 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
51 commercial organisations
51. The proposals in this paper have financial implications for employers and employees, and for the Employment Relations –Employment Standards (ERES) regulatory system.
52 Entitlement Holidays Act 2003 Proposed system considered in units of days. least 10 hours a week, or after six mon ths’ continuous employment.  Employees have the ability to take family violence leave in units of less than a day on a proportionate basis for time and pay with a minimum amount of a quarter of a day. Bereavement leave  Employees are entitled to bereavement leave of either three days or one day per bereavement.  Employees are entitled to bereavement leave after six months ’ continuous employment, or if they have worked for the employer for six months for an average of 10 hours per week and at least one hour in every week or 40 hours in every month.  Bereavement leave does not extend to: stepfamily; siblings -in- law and children -in-law; cultural family groups; aunts, uncles, nieces and nephews; and miscarriage.  Employees are entitled to bereavement leave of either three days or one day per bereavement.  Eligible employees are entitled to bereavement leave from the first day of employment.  Employees are eligible for bereavement leave if they have agreed hours and an expectation of continuous employment. If not, they are eligible after 13 weeks if they have worked on average at least 10 hours a week, or after six months ’ continuous employment.  Bereavement leave extends to: stepfamily; siblings -in-law and children -in-law; cultural family groups; aunts, uncles, nieces an d nephews; and miscarriage. Public holidays  Employees are entitled to a public holiday if it falls on a day that the employee would otherwise have worked.  Employees are entitled to a public holiday if the employee was expected to work on the day in questi on or they have worked on 50% or more of the corresponding days in either the previous 4 or 13 weeks. Alternative holidays  Employees are entitled to an alternative holiday if they: o work on a public holiday that is an Otherwise Working Day for them , or o are on call on a public holiday that is an Otherwise Working Day for them and they have to limit their activities on the day.  Employees are entitled to an alternative holiday if they: o work on a public holiday that is an Otherwise Working Day for them , or o are on call on a public holiday that is an Otherwise Working Day for them and they have to limit their activities on the day.
52 Entitlement Holidays Act 2003 Proposed system considered in units of days. least 10 hours a week, or after six mon ths’ continuous employment.  Employees have the ability to take family violence leave in units of less than a day on a proportionate basis for time and pay with a minimum amount of a quarter of a day. Bereavement leave  Employees are entitled to bereavement leave of either three days or one day per bereavement.  Employees are entitled to bereavement leave after six months ’ continuous employment, or if they have worked for the employer for six months for an average of 10 hours per week and at least one hour in every week or 40 hours in every month.  Bereavement leave does not extend to: stepfamily; siblings -in- law and children -in-law; cultural family groups; aunts, uncles, nieces and nephews; and miscarriage.  Employees are entitled to bereavement leave of either three days or one day per bereavement.  Eligible employees are entitled to bereavement leave from the first day of employment.  Employees are eligible for bereavement leave if they have agreed hours and an expectation of continuous employment. If not, they are eligible after 13 weeks if they have worked on average at least 10 hours a week, or after six months ’ continuous employment.  Bereavement leave extends to: stepfamily; siblings -in-law and children -in-law; cultural family groups; aunts, uncles, nieces an d nephews; and miscarriage. Public holidays  Employees are entitled to a public holiday if it falls on a day that the employee would otherwise have worked.  Employees are entitled to a public holiday if the employee was expected to work on the day in questi on or they have worked on 50% or more of the corresponding days in either the previous 4 or 13 weeks. Alternative holidays  Employees are entitled to an alternative holiday if they: o work on a public holiday that is an Otherwise Working Day for them , or o are on call on a public holiday that is an Otherwise Working Day for them and they have to limit their activities on the day.  Employees are entitled to an alternative holiday if they: o work on a public holiday that is an Otherwise Working Day for them , or o are on call on a public holiday that is an Otherwise Working Day for them and they have to limit their activities on the day. 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
53 Entitlement Holidays Act 2003 Proposed system Pay-as-you-go (PAYG)  If an employee works so intermittently or irregularly that it is impracticable for the employer to provide them with four weeks’ annual holidays, they may agree to be paid annual holiday pay with their pay.  PAYG is also available for employees on fixed -term arrangements of less than 12 months.  Only employees that meet the following test may agree to be paid annual holiday pay with their pay: o no minimum number of hours and no expectation of ongoing work , and o employer has no obligation to provide work or the employee to accept work , and o there is no underlying pattern of work , and o there are periods without work.  Employ ers are required to review working arrangements every 13 weeks to ensure that employees on PAYG still meet this test.  PAYG is not available to employees on fixed -term arrangements of less than 12 months (unless they meet the four -part test).
53. The majority of employees, particularly t hose with standard hours and stable earnings, should not see increased payments when compared to the current Act. However, improved clarity and certainty should help address non -compliance issues and many employees may see changes in their holiday and leav e pay as a result.
54 Annex 3: Current record -keeping requirements and proposed additional requirements to reflect the Taskforce’s recommendations Section 81 of the Holidays Act (current) Proposed new requirements * (bold bullets represent new data points ) General data  Employee name  Date of start of employment  Number of hours worked each day in a pay period and pay for those hours  Current entitlement to annual holidays  Date on which employee last became entitled to annual holidays  Current entitlement to sick days General data  Employee name  Date of start of employment  The date of any day worked, and the n umber of hours worked on that day  The start and end of any shift cycle during the pay period  For each hour paid, the c ategory of payments made (e.g. weekly pay, overtime, commiss ions, etc.)  Gross earnings over the pay period Annual holidays and FBAPS leave  Dates on which annual holidays or FBAPS have been taken  Amount of payment for annual holidays or FBAPS taken  Portion of annual holidays that have been paid out in each entitlem ent year  Date and amount of payment for cashed -out annual holidays Annual holidays  The entitlement to annual holidays at the beginning of each pay period, expressed in weeks or portion of weeks .  The date on which the employee last received an entitle ment to annual holidays , and what the entitlement was, expressed in weeks or portions of weeks  The dates on which the employee used any of their annual leave entitlement, and: o whether the annual leave was during a close down period, under section 32 of th e Act o how much leave was used for each day of leave, expressed in portions of a week .  The b alance of annual leave at the end of the pay period expressed in weeks or portion of weeks Public holidays  Dates and payments for public holidays worked  Number of hours wo rked on public holidays  Day or part of a day of any transferred public holidays  Date of entitlement to an alternative holiday  Dates and payments for any public or alternative holiday not worked but entitled to holiday pay  Cash value of any board or lodging s  Payments for cashed -out alternative holidays FBAPS leave  The entitlement to each category of FBAPS leave, at the beginning of the pay period, expressed in days or portions of days  The date on which the employee last received any entitlement to FBAPS lea ve (for each type of leave, and what the entitlement was, expressed in days)  The dates on which the employee used any of their FBAPS leave entitlements, and how much leave was used each day (expressed in portions of a day)  The balance of FBAPS leave at the end of the pay period, expressed in days or portions of days  If applicable, a record of the hours test that was applied to determine eligibility for family violence, bereavement and sick leave  If applicable, a record of the 50% or more corresponding days in previous 4 or 13 weeks test to determine an Otherwise Working Day for FBAPS leave Termination records  Date of termination of employment  Holiday pay upon termination of employment Public holidays  Dates and payments for public holidays worked  Number of h ours worked on public holidays  Day or part of a day of any transferred public holidays  Date of entitlement to an alternative holiday  Dates and payments for any public or alternative holiday not worked but entitled to holiday pay
54 Annex 3: Current record -keeping requirements and proposed additional requirements to reflect the Taskforce’s recommendations Section 81 of the Holidays Act (current) Proposed new requirements * (bold bullets represent new data points ) General data  Employee name  Date of start of employment  Number of hours worked each day in a pay period and pay for those hours  Current entitlement to annual holidays  Date on which employee last became entitled to annual holidays  Current entitlement to sick days General data  Employee name  Date of start of employment  The date of any day worked, and the n umber of hours worked on that day  The start and end of any shift cycle during the pay period  For each hour paid, the c ategory of payments made (e.g. weekly pay, overtime, commiss ions, etc.)  Gross earnings over the pay period Annual holidays and FBAPS leave  Dates on which annual holidays or FBAPS have been taken  Amount of payment for annual holidays or FBAPS taken  Portion of annual holidays that have been paid out in each entitlem ent year  Date and amount of payment for cashed -out annual holidays Annual holidays  The entitlement to annual holidays at the beginning of each pay period, expressed in weeks or portion of weeks .  The date on which the employee last received an entitle ment to annual holidays , and what the entitlement was, expressed in weeks or portions of weeks  The dates on which the employee used any of their annual leave entitlement, and: o whether the annual leave was during a close down period, under section 32 of th e Act o how much leave was used for each day of leave, expressed in portions of a week .  The b alance of annual leave at the end of the pay period expressed in weeks or portion of weeks Public holidays  Dates and payments for public holidays worked  Number of hours wo rked on public holidays  Day or part of a day of any transferred public holidays  Date of entitlement to an alternative holiday  Dates and payments for any public or alternative holiday not worked but entitled to holiday pay  Cash value of any board or lodging s  Payments for cashed -out alternative holidays FBAPS leave  The entitlement to each category of FBAPS leave, at the beginning of the pay period, expressed in days or portions of days  The date on which the employee last received any entitlement to FBAPS lea ve (for each type of leave, and what the entitlement was, expressed in days)  The dates on which the employee used any of their FBAPS leave entitlements, and how much leave was used each day (expressed in portions of a day)  The balance of FBAPS leave at the end of the pay period, expressed in days or portions of days  If applicable, a record of the hours test that was applied to determine eligibility for family violence, bereavement and sick leave  If applicable, a record of the 50% or more corresponding days in previous 4 or 13 weeks test to determine an Otherwise Working Day for FBAPS leave Termination records  Date of termination of employment  Holiday pay upon termination of employment Public holidays  Dates and payments for public holidays worked  Number of h ours worked on public holidays  Day or part of a day of any transferred public holidays  Date of entitlement to an alternative holiday  Dates and payments for any public or alternative holiday not worked but entitled to holiday pay 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
54% among licensed immigration advisers
54. Estimates of the direct costs for employers (and corresponding direct benefits for employees) are based on payroll testing undertaken on behalf of the Taskforce by an independent professional services company using real payroll data. By design, the testing sample included a large overrepresentation of employees with varied and unpredictable working arrangements (as these workers are most likely to be affected by changes to the Holidays Act). This meant that a range of assumptions had to be used in order to ‘scale up’ the impacts to the entire workforce.
55  Cash value of any board or lodgings  Payments for cashed -out alternative holidays
55. The total additional direct cost to employers of adopting the Taskforce’s recommendations is estimated to be up to $310.3 million per year (with a corresponding benefit for employees). This represents less than 0.3 per cent of New Zealand’s total 2019 wage and salary bill. The impact is broken down as follows:
56. MBIE issued a public consultation document on 10 May 2017 with a four week consultation period. The consultation involved an iterative process involving agencies that need the information (including the intelligence community, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Transport, the New Zealand Defence Force, and the Civil Aviation A uthority ) and the entities that must provide the information to ensure that we calibrate in such a way that we are only asking for what we need to apply the tests in the OSHAA Act , having regard to the costs of providing the information, and we are asking for the information in a way that is most helpful to the applicants. In addition to seeking submissions MBIE officials also travelled to the United States to meet with prospective applicants and relevant United Stages regulatory agencies. 57. Key themes from the feedback from industry (including nine written submissions) : • Ensuring that the information requirements are the minimum necessary and consistent with international requirements
56. Many of the Taskforce’s recommendations will necessitate changes to payroll systems and employers will incur compliance costs in transitioning to the amended Holidays Act. While the projected compliance costs have not been quantified, I note that, for employers that are already compliant with the current Holidays Act, the upfront changes to payroll systems required to implement the Taskforce’s recommendations should be relatively minor (as the recommendations amount to an improved status quo). In the longer term, the greater certainty provided by the Taskforce recommendations should see compliance costs reduce for employers.
57% were approved through the Samoan Quota.
58% tourism spending is by domestic visitors
58. I intend to submit a Budget bid to support the implementation of the Holidays Act amendments.
59. The State sector disproportionately employs workers in two of the sectors anticipated to be most impacted by the Taskforce’s proposals. Approximately 34 per cent of the ‘health care and social assistance’ workforce and 100 per cent of the ‘public administr ation and safety’ workforce are employed in the State sector, compared to the State sector’s proportion of the total New Zealand workforce of 16 per cent. It is likely that a greater proportion of the marginal fiscal impacts of the Taskforce’s proposals wi ll be apportioned to the Government than the State sector’s 16 per cent of the workforce would suggest. There are also likely to be cost pressures for Government funded services provided through private sector employers.
5G information pack [PDF 446KB]
6 2022- NZEmpC- 141-E- Tu-Inc-and-ors-v-CHH.pdf (employmentcourt.govt.nz) 2324- 2225 8 If an employee elects to do so, the employer must allow the employee to take at least 2 weeks of their AL entitlement in a continuous period. available), and cannot withhold consent to an employee taking at least 2 weeks of their accrued AL entitlement in a continuous period. Employers can require employees to tak e AL they have become entitled to if: • they cannot reach agreement with their employee about when AL will be taken or • they have a closedown period and they give the employee at least 14 days notice If an employee’s AL entitlement balance is greater than 4 weeks an employer can require employees to take AL entitlement in excess of 4 weeks but only if: • they have sought to confer with the employee and genuinely tried to reach agreement about when the leave is to be taken and been unable to or • they have an established closedown period and they give the employee at least 14 days’ notice of the requirement to take AL entitlement.
6 Executive Summary and recommendations Summary 1. The issues that the Holidays Act 2003 (the Act) pose s for employers, employees and others are well documented. Many employers struggle to comply with the Act, especially where there is unpredictable variation in employees ’ working arrangements or payment rates , and there have been , and continue to be , many costly remediation cases. The lack of clarity and certainty associated with the current Act make it difficult to implement for employers and hard for employees to be sure that they are receiving their statutory entitlements. 2. To address the issues with the current Act , the Taskforce proposes a range of recommendations to revise the system for determining, calculating and paying the statutory leave enti tlements set out in the Act. 3. Although it consi dered a wide range of employee working arrangements , at a high level the Taskforce focused on achieving the following goals for two broad groups:  For those employees with clear, predictable work patterns , the Taskforce wanted to ensure that taking leave and calculating leave payments should be an easy and simple process .  For those employees with uncertainty about some or many aspects of their working arrangements (for example, unpredictable working hours and/ or payment rates), the Taskforce wanted to ensur e that the re are c lear prescriptive rules that employees and employers can use to accurately determine , calculate and pay leave entitlements . 4. The Taskforce recommend s a system that retains the existing units of entitlement set out in the Act. This means that annual holidays entitlements w ould continue to be calculated, taken and paid in weeks with FBAPS2 entitlements continu ing to be calculated, taken and paid in days. Although the Taskforce is proposing that the units of entitlement be retained , it propos es significant changes in a number of areas to provide the certainty and clarity that employers and employees require. These range from clear prescriptive methodolog ies for determin ing deductions and payments for all paid leave , to a new and objective ‘Otherwise Working Day’ test , for categorically determin ing whether an employee is eligible for a day of FBAPS leave. 5. The Taskforce ’s recommendations address the T erms of Reference and will greatly improve the wo rkability of the Act. The Taskforce is well aware that uncertainty costs businesses as well as being unsettling and potentially costly for employees. This is why these recommendations include clear methodologies to provide definitive answers in those cases where it is not obvious how to determine leave entitlements and payments. 6. Employees with fixed, predictable hours and regular pay will see little change as a result of the bulk of the Taskforce’s proposals. Calculating leave deductions and payments will remain simple for these straightforward cases. It is those e mployees with varied or unpredictable working hours and/or payments who will most benefit from the Taskforce’s proposals . These employees will now have the certainty that has been lacking to date a bout how any periods of paid leave should be calculated and taken. 7. The diagrams on pages 1 1-12 indicate the key points of uncertainty in the current approaches to determining annual holidays and FBAPS leave payments that would be addressed under t he Task force’ s proposed methodolog ies for determining payments for all leave types.
6 In December 2021, the Minister agreed to an extension of the timeframe for the statutory review of the OSHAA. Since the original commissioning, the feasib ility of delivering the final report within the original timeframe had been impacted by two key factors (alignment with other related work and the size and complexity of the work required to analyse and reach conclusions on certain matters raised via submi ssions). The report back date was extended to 31 March 2022 .
6 It is acknowledged that in some cases a prosecution decision maker may make a prosecution decision, conditional on review by a prosecutor. This is acceptable under these procedures and guidelines provi ded the decision maker carries out the substance of their role under this document. 7 Para 6.6, Legal Services Policy. Title: Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines Date of Issue: July 2018 Security Classification Unclassified Version: 1.1 Review ed June 2024 Approved By: Chief Legal Officer Owner: Chief Legal Officer Page 8 of 16 7 Finalisation of charges 7.1 Once the decision to prosecute is finalised, the accountability for legal issues in connection with the prosecution file passes to the prosecutor. In particular, the prosecutor: a. determin es the wording of the charge(s) and b. ensures the prosecution file is prepared to an appropriate standard. 7.2 MBIE may bring charges under the legislation that it administers or other legislation, including (most commonly) the Crimes Act 1961. When deciding whi ch legislation to lay a charge under, the prosecutor will have particular regard to the nature of the alleged conduct and the charge that would most appropriately mark that conduct. 7.3 It is the responsibility of the prosecutor, in consultation with the inves tigator or prosecution decision maker to determine what charges are appropriate. When making decisions on charges, the following matters must be taken into account: a. the selection of charges must take into account the totality of the offending. Representati ve charges should be considered for repeated or ongoing conduct where the criteria under s20 of the Criminal Procedure Act 2011 are made out and b. if the offending relates to acts or omissions attributed to a company or other corporate entity, the charges sh ould reflect: i. the purpose of the relevant legislation and any express provision as to party liability; and ii. the relative culpability of that corporate entity and/or its officers and employees. 7.4 If the most obvious charge on the facts of the case is a specifi c charge that is not available because a limitation period has expired, it is only in exceptional cases that it will be appropriate to select a more general charge with a higher penalty. 7.5 The relevant Crown Solicitor should be consulted in particularly complex or serious cases likely to result in Crown Prosecutions, or where certification by a Crown Solicitor is required under an Act. Some offences, due to their seriousness, require the con sent of the Attorney -General before a charge can be laid. Where these charges are contemplated early advice should be sought from the prosecutor who will arrange to seek the required consent from Crown Law. 7.6 The Prosecution -Guidelines provide broad guidance about choosing charges. Considerations include: a. the number of charges must reflect the alleged conduct and the public interest in having appropriate convictions entered against the defendant b. neither the number nor seriousness of charges should be decided by having regard to the impact of that decision on the likelihood of an offer by the defendant to plead guilty to lesser charges. 8 Infringeme nts 8.1 Infringement offences are generally able to be proceeded with by infringement notices or through the filing of a charging document8. Each infringement must therefore be able to be proven to the criminal standard. 8.2 Even where an infringement offence cannot be proceeded with by way of a charging document, if a person issued with an infringement notice disputes the offence and/or forma lly requests a hearing,
6 MBIE (2014). Calculating Payment for Leave: Summary of the compliance issues with the Holidays Act 2003. 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:06:16
6 What role do you think the Labour Inspectorate , or any other agency or institution , should have in relation to any future holidays legislation ?
6. I consider that the Taskforce’s recommendations should be adopted in full as the basis for an amended Holidays Act. The proposed amendments (summarised in Annex One, and set out in full on pages 28 to 47 of the Taskforce’s report) will provide all regulated parties with much needed certainty, while protecting overall entitlements for employees.
6. Note that the Minister for ACC will report back to Cabinet by March 2017 with advice on the progress of all the proposals listed in Appendix 2 including:
6. The cost of implementation will vary for employers depending on a range of factors, including the type of payroll system/s they currently use to manage pay and leave. Officials estimated that approximately 20 to 30 percent of employers do not currently use payroll software, 10 to 30 percent use non -cloud - based payroll software and 50 to 60 per cent use either ‘off -the-shelf’ (often smaller employers) or bespoke (often larger employers including government agencies) cloud - based payroll software.
6.1 the proposal to increase funding for existing free advocacy services for accident compensation claimants,
6.2 What are the implementation risks? As part of the Taskforce’s consultation process, payroll providers indicated that they would require at least 12 months to update their systems in order to comply with a new Act. There were also some concerns that the Taskforce’s recommendations remain complex in some ar eas and employers who do not use payroll systems or have dedicated payroll functions , particularly SMEs, may have difficulty complying with a new Act. These issues could be mitigated by including payroll providers and employers in the Better Rules process focusing on implementation and delaying the date at which new requirements come into effect by 12 to 18 months. Plenty of support, guidance and tools would also be developed to help comply with a new Act, with a particular focus on SMEs. 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:06:16
6.2 the proposal to fund a free nationwide advocacy service modelled broadly on the Health and Disability Commission Advocacy Service, and
6.3 any implications for ACC levies and appropriations arising from the implementation of the review recommendations as listed in Appendix 2.
60. Cabinet agreed to a new prescriptive four -step methodology with detailed formulas and rules to provide certainty in these cases.
60. The prop osals in this paper will form the basis of an amended Holidays Act. I have submitted a legislative programme bid for amendments to the Holidays Act with a Category 5 status (instructions to be provided to Parliamentary Counsel Office in 2020).
61. The Regulatory Impact Analysis requirements apply to the proposals in this paper and a Regulatory Impact Statement (RIS) has been prepared and is attached.
62. MBIE’s Regulatory Impact Analysis Review Panel has reviewed the ‘Improving the Holidays Act 2003’ RIS and considers that the information and analysis summarised partially meets the Quality Assurance criteria.
63. The reviewers commented: “[the RIS is a partial meets] because the second option (accrual -based system for annual holidays) has not been analysed to the same extent as the first option as it was dismissed relatively early by the Taskforce, despite their early consultation indicating wide support for the second option, particularly by employers. There has been limited time for analy sis or consultation post -Taskforce to better understand the impacts of the second option and so it is difficult to compare the options on a like -for-like basis”.
63. This Regulatory Impact Statement concludes that regulations are necessary to set out requirements for licences and permits, particularly for the information to be provided. The preferred approach for information requirements is to seek the minimum amount of information necessary to enable the regulator to undertake the statutory tests in the OSHAA Act . The information requirements are informed by overseas regulatory models and have been produced in close consultation with oth er New Zealand agencies and with prospective applicants. 64. The Regulatory Impact Statement also propose s an exemption for certain classes of low-risk HAV s. This is consistent with the policy objectives of not imposing a disproportionate cost on low risk HAV operators , and manages risk appropriately in by ensuring high risk activities are not exempt 6 Implementation plan
64. The amendments to the Holidays Act proposed by the Taskforce appear to be consi stent with the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990 and the Human Rights Act 1993.
65. Adopting the Taskforce’s recommendation to remove the parental leave ‘override’ in the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act 1987 will have a pos itive impact on employment rights for parents of young children in general and women in particular (because the ‘override’ has a disproportionate impact on women). This issue is explained in more detail in paragraphs 24 -28 of this paper.
65. The OSHAA Act will come into force on 21 December 2017 . 66. Once Cabinet has agreed to the proposals, drafting instructions will be issued. It is expected that regu lations will be promulgated by early September. 67. In addition, officials are working with affected parties to prepare them for the regime coming into force . Schedule 1 of the OSHAA Act (clause 5A) enables the Minister in issuing a high-altitude licence on or after the commencement date to take into account any action or process undertaken before the commencement date if they substantially complied with the provisions of this OSHAA Act . This will enable officials to work with affected parties to ensure that they have a licence for high -altitude activities on the day that the OSHAA Act comes into force. 68. The OSHAA Act contains transitional provisions for Rocket Lab and for payloads carried by Rocket Lab to ensure a smooth transition from the existing contractual arrangements in place to manage their New Zealand activities to the new OSHAA Act .
66. Amending the Act to make it easier for employers to implement, and easier for employees to be sure they are receiving their correct statutory entitlements, is likely to benefit disabled people. Disabled people are likely to be overrepresented in the group of employees with varied or unpredictable working hours and/or payments that stand to benefit most from the Taskforce’s proposals. Once the proposals are implemented, this group of employees should have more certa inty about how any periods of paid leave should be calculated and taken.
67. With the Enabling Good Lives demonstrations in Christchurch and Waikato, and the Mid-Central System Transformation prototype, more disabled people are employing their own support sta ff. The proposed changes to the legislation to provide greater clarification of obligations as employers should therefore reduce the risk of non - compliance with the Act by all employers, including disabled employers.
68% were not in New Zealand 5 years later.
68. The proposed recommendations, includi ng increased flexibility and clarity, are also likely to benefit support workers across the disability sector. This group of employees may often have irregular or unpredictable work hours and/or payments.
69. The proposals in this paper support the outcomes o f the New Zealand Disability Strategy 2016 -2026, in particular Outcomes 2: Employment and economic security, 5: Accessibility (of information), and 7: Choice and control.
69. Through the licence application process, MBIE will collect a range of data points (such as number of application s, types of vehicle, payloads, types of applicants) which will give us the ability to monitor the volumes and types of New Zealand space activities. The information gathered will also be used to measure the time and cost involved in administering the licensing process (this information is essential to enable us to cost the New Zealand Space Agency operations). We will also seek feedback from applicants about their experience of the licence application process. 70. New Zealand has certain international obligatio ns relating to space activities and space technologies. The OSHAA Act provides mechanisms to meet those obligations through, for example, conditions imposed on licences and permits. The regulator will monitor compliance with licences and permits to ensure that the activities are conducted in accordance with the terms and conditions of the licence or permit. 71. In addition, a three year review is built into the OSHAA Act . At this time we expect to revisit whether the regulations proposed in this document remain fit for purpose . However, the regulations can be revisited at any time if needed so that they remain current particularly in light of evolving international space law and changing technologies.
697 kt of all waste (4%) was recycled
6What role do you think the Labour Inspectorate , or any other agency or institution , should have in relation to any future holidays legislation ?
6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:12:15
6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:12:15 Confidential advice to Government Confidential advice to Government I N C O N F I D E N C E 9 I N C O N F I D E N C E 43 The Climate Implications of Policy Assessment (CIPA) team has been consulted and confirms that the CIPA requirements do not apply. Financial Imp lications 44 The methodologies for determining leave entitlements agreed by Cabinet in 2020 would necessitate significant changes to every payroll system used by New Zealand employers, including Government payroll systems .8 The proposals in this paper are intended to reduce the changes that would be required , thereby reducing the financial implications of the reforms for employers . This includes the costs that would be incurred by government as an employer. 45 The cost of implementation will vary for employers depending on a range of factors, including the type of payroll systems they currently use to manage pay and leave. I intend to ask targeted questions to elicit more details about the implementation costs as part of the exposure draft consultation process and will provide further information in my December 2024 report back to Cabinet . 46 While there may be benefits in terms of implementation costs, t he proposals in this paper will not significantly alter the co sts employers will incur in terms of providing entitlements (refer to Appendix One for more information) . The 2020 RIS estimated that the total additional cost to employers of those proposals could be up to $310.3 million per year .9 Cost -of-living Implications 47 Employers may pass on the implementation costs and increase s to the costs of leave entitlements to consumers. That is why my proposals are intended to reduce the total costs of reforms to the Act incurred by employers. Simpler and clearer obligations will also help to ensure employees receive their statutory entitlements. Human R ights 48 The 2020 Cabinet policy decisions on amendments to the Act were assessed to appear to be consistent with the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990 and the Human Rights Act 1993 . The changes to those decisions proposed in this paper maintain broad align ment with those decisions and do not alter that assessment. The exposure draft consultation process will provide opportunity to gain further insights into the distributional impacts of the changes and any issues for specific population groups. Communications 49 Following Cabinet decisions on the proposals in this paper I propose to announce th e Government’s intent to release an exposure draft for targeted consultation . To ensure a variety of stakehol ders are included and represented in targeted consultation, I will encourage anyone who is interested in having input to contact MBIE within a defined time period. Depending on how much interest there is, MBIE will select a
6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:12:15 Confidential advice to Government I N C O N F I D E N C E 13 I N C O N F I D E N C E Appendix One: Summary of issues with the Holidays Act and proposed response (green text represents changes proposed in the paper , black text in right column represents areas where the previous Government’s decisions are being progressed for the exposure d raft) Key issues with the Holidays Act 2003 Response in the Employment (Leave Entitlement) Bill Entitlement to Annual Leave (AL) Earning annual leave 4-weeks entitlement arises after 12 months ‘continuous employment’ meaning employees may have to wait to take leave and the framework does not support accrual -based systems which many employers use. • A weeks -based accrual system with entitlement accruing continuously during employment, with clear supporting parameters. Using annual leave • The meaning of a week of AL entitlement requires judgement and agreement each time an employee takes leave when work does not fit a traditiona l seven -day cycle. • A new methodology for determining use of AL entitlement that provides certainty for all working arrangements. Pay-as-you-go • Judgement and discretion are required to determine eligibility for employers to receive holiday entitlement in their regular pay. • New objective criteria for determining eligibility for using pay -as-you-go along with a clear framework for reviewing its use during employment. Closedown periods • Provisions for having a closedown period lack clarity, certainty, and transparency. • Provisions provide greater clarity and transparency around how employees are notified about closedown periods. Entitlements to Family Violence, Bereavement and Sick (FBS) Leave , Public and Alternative Holidays (FBAPS leave) Earning FBS leave • FBS leave entitlements arise after six months ‘continuous empl oyment’ meaning employee’s may not be able to access leave for FBS purposes if they need it in their first six months. • Eligible employees have access to FBS leave entitlement s from the first day of employment and eligibility criteria are clearer. 10 days s ick leave accumulates over the first six months. Using FBS leave • No explicit provision for taking part days of FBS leave. • Ability to take part days of FBS leave proportionate to time that would have been worked on the day. Bereavement leave entitlement • Eligibility to take three days bereavement leave not inclusive of varied family arrangements or cultural practices. • Eligibility to take three days bereavement leave expanded so that employees can access it for more family members. Otherwise Working Day (OWD) • Determining whether a day is an OWD for the purpose of entitlement to paid FBAPS leave requires the use of judgement. • A new prescriptive OWD test with a clear application for all leave types and working arrangements. Payments for all types of leave Payment methodologies • Inclusion of variable components of pay in calculations: lack of clarity around what constitutes a ‘regular’ overtime and incentive payment and the value of such payments, discretion is also required to decide when criteria are met for using alternative averaging formulas. • A new ‘greater of three’ methodology for calculating annual leave payments: Ordinary Weekly Leave Pay (which does not include variable components of pay) and quarterly and annual average weekly earnings. • A new calculation for FBAPS leave payments: a base rate for wages/salary and fixed allow ances, plus an average of productivity or incentive payments. Gross earnings • Definition is not clear about payment types that must be included and has been one of the most common litigation issues. • New definition of gross earnings provides clarity around which payment types to include. End of employment • The different calculations for paying employees for AL they have and have not become entitled to when employment ends cause confusion and is difficult to apply. • One payment calculation for AL when employment ends (an accrual -based system makes the calculation for AL an employee has not yet become entitled to redundant). Overrides to the Act • AL payment method ‘overrides’ for employers who take parental and volunteers leave result in employees receiving reduced pay for annual leave. • AL payment method ‘overrides’ removed so employees returning from parental and volunteers leave will be paid according to the normal rules for annual leave, rather than their pay only being based on their average weekly earnings over the last 52 weeks. Other provisions Leave in restructuring situations • Lack of legislative clarity about treatment of leave entitlements in restructuring situations which results in common practice in breach of the Act (which requires AL to be paid out). • A flexible approach (for employees not specified in Part 6A of the Employment Relations Act 2000) enabling the treatment of leave entitlements to be negotiated by the incoming and outgoing employers rather than requiring AL to be paid out. Information about pay and leave • Employees have the right to ask for information kept in records but there is no requirement for employers to directly inform them about how pay and leave have been calculated. • A legal requirement to provide a pay statemen t in each pay period to provide greater transparency about leave and pay for employees. Leave records • There are some gaps in requirements and changes to the Act will require some additional information to be held in records to support calculations. • Updated record -keeping requirements including some new information and some clarifications to existing provisions. 6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:12:15 I N C O N F I D E N C E 14 I N C O N F I D E N C E Appendix two : Proposed adjustments to the 2020 Cabinet decisions related to the provisions for providing, taking and paying annual leave Area Context Proposal Framework for providing AL entitlement In 2020, Cabinet agreed that : i. employees should continue to become entitled to four weeks’ AL after ‘12 months ’ continuous employment ’ but, ii. rather than have to wait until AL entitlement arises to use it, an employer must not unreasonably withhold consent to an employee taking ‘AL in advance on a pro -rata basis’.
6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:12:15 Confidential advice to Government, Free and frank opinions I N C O N F I D E N C E 20 I N C O N F I D E N C E
6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:12:15 I N C O N F I D E N C E
6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:12:15 I N C O N F I D E N C E 10 I N C O N F I D E N C E representative sample for the ma in stakeholder groups. This strategy is particularly intended to target small businesses, who will adopt a range of working arrangements and who often do not have the same payroll infrastructure as larger organisations. Proactive Release 50 I intend to proactively release this Cabinet paper (subject to redactions in line with the Official Information Act 1982) . I will consider the timing of the proactive release of this paper alongside my announcement about the release of an exposure draft. Recommendati ons The Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety recommends that the Committee: 1 note that, in March 2020 , Cabinet agreed to endorse in full the recommendations of the Holidays Act Taskforce [CAB -20-MIN-0100] (which it had established in 2018 [CAB -18-MIN-0250] ) as the basis for a substantially amended Holidays Act ; 2 note that, from 2021 to 2023 , the then Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety made some decisions under the authority delegated by Cabinet to address technical issues and the Parliamentary Counsel Office (PCO) commenced work on drafting the Employment (Leave Entitlements) Bill, but work has been on hold since June 2023 ; 3 note that, despite refinements made, the detailed methodologies and processes Cabinet agreed to result in inevitable complexity , would require significant changes to payro ll systems , and represent a significant and costly compliance burden ; Changes to existing Cabinet policy decisions 4 note that the following policy changes and additions to the 2020 Cabinet decisions (set out in detail in Appendic es Two, Three and Four) would simplify obligations and reduce compliance costs while broadly aligning with the existing policy decisions and underlying entitlements model ; Annual leave (AL) (Appendix Two) 4.1 agree to rescind the decision that employees continue to become entitled to four weeks ’ annual leave (AL) after 12 months ’ continuous employment and replace it with a weeks -based accrual system with a clear set of parameters to support its operation ; 4.2 agree to adjustments to the provisions in the Act that relate to employees’ rights to take AL , employer s’ rights to require an employee to take AL and to the rules for exchanging AL for payment to reconcile them with a weeks - based accrual system ; 4.3 agree to rescind the decision that employers must allow employees to take AL in advance beyond their ‘pro -rata entitlement’ during a n annual closedown period ; 4.4 agree to rescind the decision that the m ethodology for determining the hours an employee would have worked on a day of leave (AL and other leave types) be based on a ‘calendar day’ average and replace it with a formula that uses an average across all days of work in pay periods that started in the previous 13 weeks ; 6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:12:15 I N C O N F I D E N C E 11 I N C O N F I D E N C E 4.5 agree to rescind the decision to in troduce an audit requirement for employees who have guaranteed hours of work and work additional hours so that, in these situations, guaranteed hours are used as the basis of leave calculations ; 4.6 agree to amend the decision to introduce a four-part test for paying AL as a regular part of an employee’s pay (pay-as-you-go) and to require employers to review its use every 13 week s; 4.7 authorise the Minister f or Workplace Relations and Safety to make decisions on the detail of provisions for using pay -as-you-go in order to align with the following approach: 4.7.1 provide objective criteria for using pay -as-you-go that do not require the application of judgement; 4.7.2 reduce the administrative burden and compliance costs of the review process during employment. Other leave types (Appendix Three) 4.8 agree to rescind the decision to require the comparison of two leave calculations for other leave types and repla ce it with a consolidated single calculation ; 4.9 agree to a revi sed accumulation profile for sick leave to take into account the increase in sick leave from five to 10 days since the 2020 Cabinet decisions ; Amendments to other Acts (Appendix Four) 4.10 agree to replace the reference to O rdinary Weekly Pay (OWP) in the Parental Leave Employment Protection Act 1987 (PLEPA) with a standalone formula that is aligned with the methodology I nland Revenue currently uses for the calculated income estimate of OWP ; 4.11 agree to rescind the decision that on the sale and transfer of a business, employees should have a choice about whether to transfer all of their leave entitlements or have them paid out and reset ; and 4.11.1 for employees specified in Schedule 1A of the Employment Relations Act 2000 (the ERA) , retain the status quo which requires the automatic transfer of entitlements if employment is transferred ; 4.11.2 for all other employees , replace the decision with a flexible approach that ensures incoming and outgoing employers have to consider the treatment of entitlements when employees transfer rather than always being paid out under the Act ; Implementation period 5 note that, in 2020, Cabinet directed MBIE to develop a transition plan and report back to Cabinet [CAB -20-MIN-0100] and that MBIE completed this work during its 2021 -2022 policy design process in consultation with its stakeholder working group ; 6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:12:15 I N C O N F I D E N C E
6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:12:15 I N C O N F I D E N C E 17 I N C O N F I D E N C E Determining use of AL for employees who have guaranteed hours of work and work additional hours Cabinet agreed that, where employees have guaranteed hours included in their employment agreement , those hours would be used for the purposes of determining the use of AL entitlement. It also agreed that there be an ‘audit requirement’ such that , if an employee’s actual hours of work were found to be 20 percent or more above their guaranteed hours over a 13 -week period, then the employer must determine their use of AL based on their actual, rather than guaranteed, hours of work using averaging calculations.
6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:12:15 I N C O N F I D E N C E 21 I N C O N F I D E N C E Appendix Four : Proposed amendments to parental leave and employment relations legislation Area Context Proposal Methodology for determining parental leave payments (amending the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act 1987 ) The Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act 1987 (PLEPA) relies on the definition of “ordinary weekly pay” (OWP) in the Act to calcula te parental leave payments. Cabinet agreed that OWP be replaced and so a consequential amendment is needed in the PLEPA.
6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:12:15 I N C O N F I D E N C E 24 I N C O N F I D E N C E Appendix Five: Supplementary Impact Analysis (to the 2020 Regulatory Impact Statement)
6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:12:39
6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:12:39 Confidential advice to Government Confidential advice to Government Confidential advice to Government
7 8. A number of options were developed and tested in the course of the re view . These includ ed two versions of an hours -based accrual system (where employees earn annual holidays in ho urs at a set percentage rate for every hour worked). This type of accrual system was supported by some stakeholders and opposed by others . The testing of the accrual options identified that such a system would leave some people worse off. As a result , the Taskforce did not proceed with further development of an hours -based accrual system . 9. All members agree that the recommendations in this report provide a solution that meets the objectives of the review. Consensus would not have been achievable on any other approach . 10. The key elements of the Taskforce’s proposals are set out below:  Annual holidays entitlements should be calculated, taken , paid and held in weeks or portions of weeks , while FBAPS leave should continue to be held in days  A prescriptive appro ach to calculating payment s for leave . This would pay the greater of the following payments for the relevant period of annual leave : o Ordinary Leave Pay (base rate plus any scheduled overtime , allowance, commission and incentive payments) o Average weekly pay for the last four or 13 weeks o Average weekly pay for the last 52 weeks .  Each day (or part -day) of FBAPS leave should be paid based on the greater of: o Ordinary Leave Pay o Average Daily Pay  A prescriptive process to determine how much leave needs to be take n for an employee to have a period of time away from work (this will be particularly useful if it is not clear what a “week ” is for an employee )  An employee would still become entitled to four weeks ’ annual holidays after 12 months but would have the abili ty to take leave in advance on a pro -rata basis  A prescriptive ‘O therwise Working Day’ test for determinin g when a particular day is an ‘O therwise Working Day’ for FBAPS purposes (e.g. if an employee has worked 50 per cent or more of the corresponding days in the previous four or 13 weeks)  A clearer definition of ‘gross earnings’ would be used as the default for all leave payment calculations3 as follows: o ‘employee’s leave payment s should reflect all cash payments received, except direct reimbursements for costs incurred’ . 11. One of the key problems with the current Act is the lack of clarity that it provides about how to determine leave entitlements and payments when there is variability or uncertainty about an employee’s working pattern (for example, when an employee’s pay varies or when an employee ’s hours of work have no set pattern). 12. The Taskforce’s recommendations directly address this lack of clarity and provide the certainty needed , through a series of prescriptive methodologies and tests that will prov ide definitive answers even in cases where certain aspects of the working arrangement are unpredictable or variable. These include:
7 8shrvakdix 2020 -06-03 14:04:00 spread over a number of pay periods (with potentially significant impacts on the value of leave used in the affected pay periods and the amount of tax paid).
7 Do you agree with the description of the cross -cutting issues set out on pages 15 -16? If not, why not?
7 Monitoring, evaluation and review
7 Volumes are the total instances of a specific activity in a year – eg the total number of annual returns filed each year with the Companies Office on the Companies register. Volumes are included in this document where relevant and summarised in Appendix Three: Forecast annual volumes by register to determine unit costs . Costs to be allocated •The current budget and the additional expenditure required for improvements and the registry activities to be recovered.Cost allocators •Each cost item (eg salaries, IT support, travel) from the Companies Office financial report is assigned an appropriate cost allocator based on specific assumptions by register. •Personnel costs are split by team and then allocated across the registries and services those teams are responsible for.Registry services •Each cost item is allocated across the registry services based on its assigned cost allocator. •Direct and indirect costs are allocated across services that are to incur a fee. These costs were divided by volumes to get a unit cost. •Volumes used in the cost allocation model are based on an analysis of past data and a forecast of future growth based on economic trends. 17 Cost recovery principles guide the setting of fees and levies The way costs are allocated has been informed by general cost recovery guidelines. Three principles set by the Treasury and the OAG have been used to develop and analyse the impact of options for setting fees and levies. The principles recommend that fees and levies to be set in a way that is:8 • justified : costs recovered through fees and levies should reasonably relate to the services they are charged for, with any indirect costs appropriately included ( eg MBIE’s technical support costs); • efficient : fees and levies should closely reflect the actual costs needed to provide registry services, so that users experience value -for-money; and • equitable : the Companies Office should ensure that fees and levies are applied and managed so that they are fair for all users of its registry services. Third -party fees and levies should also be transparent (a fourth principle in the OAG guidelines). Revenue from fees and levies should be correctly accounted for and used appropriately, and the process for developing fees and levies should be clear and easily understood. Where relevant, these principles have been applied to options for how specific fees and levies could be set to derive the cost recovery impacts ( eg which users pay and how often, how much cost is allocated to a fee or a levy , and how it impacts the total amount to be paid to the Companies Office). All proposed fees or levies in this document represent the preferred option , including the proposed additional expenditure of $6.0 million. Proposed cost recovery structure: splitting existing costs between fees and levies A revised cost recovery structure for all registers is proposed, splitting existing and new charges into fees and levies, to better reflect that the Companies Office operates its registers as a system with shared services. Historically, the Companies Office has recovered the costs of operating all its registers from users through fees. Over time it has introduced shared services ( eg personnel and systems that work across registers) to better manage increasing operating costs without significant fee increases. It achieves this by ensuring smaller registers with low volumes of users ( eg the Friendly Societies register) do not pay a disproportionate amount to recover the costs of similar services, such as filing an annual return , than larger registers with higher volumes ( eg the Companies register). This ensures that users experience the same level of service at a fair and reasonable cost. Figure 4 on the next page shows how shared services benefit all users of the Companies Office according to cost recovery principles.
7 With the exception of one addition agreed by the previous Minister to provide clarity that, like if AL is cashed up when an employee has not requested it, if more than one week of entitlement is cashed up in an entitlement year the leave remains in force as if the payment had not been made. This is consistent with Cabinet ’s authority to make decisions on compliance and enforcement mechanisms to support the new Act. 2324- 2225 9 AL entitlement can be cashed up per year, regardless of whether any has been cashed up in previous years .8 29. The implication of a change from 12 months continuous employment to 12 months is that, if an employee has accrued less than four weeks AL entitlement in a 12 -month period (because they have had unpaid leave, they could cash up a higher proportion of their entitlement (eg six months unpaid leave would mean they can cash up one of two weeks entitlement ). If, however, an employee has taken unpaid leave, we think it is unlikely they will have accrued AL entitlement left to cash up and, regardless, have had time away from work. We considered options that would address this but concluded that the small risk of misuse of the provision did not justify the legislative and administrative complexity they would add. We recommend maintaining the status quo for AL an employee can take during a closedown period 30. In 2020 Cabinet agreed to a set of adjustments related to the framework for having closedown periods9 that primarily focused on improving clarity and transparency . Our stakeholder working group’s feedback on the detailed design of the framework was generally positive. The main concern they raised was the aspect of the Tas kforce recommendation providing that, during a closedown period, an employer would not be able to refuse an employee’s request to take AL in advance above the pro -rata amount of leave in advance (or accrued AL under an accrual system) an employee has ‘earned’. 31. The concern centres around the liability for an employer if an employee takes this AL in advance and their employment ends soon after. The liability arises because leave in advance is ‘unearned’ and payment made for it is above what the employee would be entitled to be paid out for AL if employment ended. The group raised c oncern about the difficulties for employers to recover overpayments .10 32. The working group’s concerns are likely to be raised by other stakeholders during consultation on the exposure draft. To address the liability risk and maintain the balance of interests between employers and employees, w e recommend seeking agreement in your May Cabinet paper to rescind the decision to require an employer to agree to an employee’s request to take AL in advance during a closedown period. We recommend the status quo is maintained so that, during a closedown period an employer may agree to an employee taking AL in advance if they do not have sufficient accrued AL entitlement to cover the closedown period, but an employer does not have to allow this .
7 https://www.mbie.govt.nz/assets/Uploads/bbb42c0baf/holidays -act-review -issues -paper.pdf 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:06:16
7. I acknowledge that a number of stakeh olders (particularly businesses and payroll providers) called for a more radical overhaul of the Act, centring on a simplified accrual methodology for annual holidays. However, no consensus could be achieved among Taskforce members on whether the merits of such a system (simplicity and transparency) outweighed the disadvantages. Adopting the Taskforce’s recommendations in full is therefore the only option available to substantially improve the Holidays Act while preserving tripartite consensus.
7. Invite the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety to issue drafting instructions to Parliamentary Counsel Office giving effect to the policy decisions in this paper
7. Legal Effect 1) This MOU: a) is a statement of good intention based on respective roles and responsibilities of each party; b) is entered into on a without prejudice basis; c) is not legally binding; d) does not create a legal relationship ; e) does not diminish or extinguish any rights Māori have arising from Te Tiriti o Waitangi / Treaty of Waitangi or any aboriginal or customary rights . The parties acknowledge, however, that the MOU may be relevant to the relationship between the Crown and Māori in the future , including any disputes ; and f) does not alter any existing, or create any new legal or equitable rights or obligations. 8. Shared principles 1) The following represents what the Parties believe are the shared principles , consistent with Te Tiriti o Waitangi / The Treaty of Waitangi and its principles , that underpin the way we work together and how we will achieve our shared objectives: a) We accept that utmost good faith, honour, integrity, honesty, transparency and account ability are the standards necessary to build a future trusting relationship. b) We acknowledge and celebrate the distinct but shared objectives of each other and understand we have different roads to take for the wellbeing of Aotearoa. c) We will work together c onstructively on our differences and jointly identify and resolve problems as they arise. d) We acknowledge that working together provides more effective use of our resources to achieve our shared objectives.
7.2 When and how will the new arrangements be reviewed? The new arrangements would be reviewed by MBIE as part of ongoing monitoring and compliance activities. A comprehensive review of the legislation would be initiated if serious issues were identified as part of this work.
7.5% of the value of cash refunds (excluding GST), and
70. I intend to issue a press release announcing the Government’s decision to adopt the recommendations of the Holidays Act Taskforce, and publish the Taskforce’s report on MBIE’s website.
71% among offshore student advisers.
71. As stated above in paragraph 41, some of the recommendations in the Ho lidays Act Taskforce Report may receive negative feedback, particularly from some employers or payroll providers. The media could focus on the complexity of the recommendations and question why the Government has chosen to endorse all of the Taskforce’s proposals.
72% growth in spend in the last 5 years
72. I propose to mitigate this risk by emphasising the support that the Taskforce recommendations received from both business and union representatives on the Taskforce, and highlighting the improvements that the proposed system would provide when co mpared to the status quo . It will also be made clear that businesses and employers will be given plenty of time and guidance to prepare for any changes.
73. I intend to proactively release this Cabinet paper on MBIE’s website, subject to any appropriate withholding of information that would be justified under the Official Information Act 1982.
8 Are you aware of other cross -cutting issues with the design of the current Act? If so, what are they?
8 As noted in the September 2022 final report back to Cabinet on the All of Government Payroll Programme to improve government payroll systems, many government agencies’ payroll systems are bespoke and aging, and already struggling to adapt to ongoing changes [GOV -22-MIN-0036]. 9 MBIE considers that the $310.3 million estimate is an overestimation as employees w ith variable work patterns were overrepresented in the sample. The estimate assumes that all employers currently provide minimum leave entitlements to their employees , however many already provide entitlements in line with the proposed changes.
8 Base rate plus any scheduled overtime, allowance, commission and incentive payments. 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:06:16
8 Filing a charging document would ordinarily require leave of a District Court Judge or a Registrar (Summary Proceedings Act 1 957, s 21(1)(a)). However, the specific legislation may have a provision which provides for filing without leave. Title: Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines Date of Issue: July 2018 Security Classification Unclassified Version: 1.1 Review ed June 2024 Approved By: Chief Legal Officer Owner: Chief Legal Officer Page 9 of 16 then the test for prosecution must be satisfied and the relevant procedures in this document must be complied with before MBIE files a notice of hearing in Court. 8.3 An infringement notice may be revoked by a person authorised by the G eneral Manager of the branch in which the business unit sits. 9 Records, Disclosure and Reporting 9.1 All significant prosecution advice and all prosecution decisions (including ‘no prosecution’ decisions) must be recorded in writing. 9.2 It is the responsibility of the prosecution decision - maker to record their decision and the reasons for it. Those reasons must be accurate and timely. 9.3 It is the responsibility of the prosecutor to maintain a record of any prosecution commenced and to report to the client investigat or and the relevant prosecution decision maker. 9.4 Disclosure Disclosure in prosecutions is governed by the Criminal Disclosure Act 2008 ( CDA ). Under the CDA, a “prosecutor” is the person for the time being in charge of the file or files relating to a crimina l prosecution. It therefore includes both the relevant investigator (or person in charge of the file) and the lawyer acting. Under the CDA, the prosecutor must disclose certain information to the defendant (initial disclosure) within 15 working days of th e commencement of proceedings. If requested by the defendant in writing, the prosecutor must provide additional information from the investigation file, as soon as is reasonably practicable. A list of the information that a defendant can request at this ti me is set out in section 12(2) of the CDA. The remaining information (full disclosure) must be disclosed as soon as is reasonably practicable after a defendant has pleaded not guilty. In MBIE responsibility for preparing disclosure falls on the investigato r or person in charge of the file. The prosecutor for the file is responsible for checking full disclosure and advising as required. Disclosure ensures that a defendant is able to review all relevant information relating to the prosecution, with the excep tion of information that is able to be withheld. The grounds for withholding information are contained in s 16 CDA. It is the responsibility of the prosecutor to ensure that MBIE complies with all disclosure obligations, including those set out in the CDA , and to ensure that there is a record of what has been disclosed, to whom and when and, in the case of non -disclosure, the reasons for that decision. The relevant investigator or person in charge of the file is expected to provide all necessary assistance to ensure that the prosecutor is able to discharge his or her responsibility. Final decisions on withholding or disclosing information in non - straightforward cases should be made jointly between the prosecutor, and the person in charge of the file (if nec essary with the input of the relevant manager/s). It is the responsibility of the person in charge of the file to ensure those within business units who need to be kept informed are notified of progress. 9.5 Victims In cases involving a “victim” or “victims” for the purposes of the Victim Rights Act 2002 : a. it is the responsibility of the inv estigator or other person in charge of the file to keep victims informed of progress of the investigations and prosecutions in accordance with s 12 of that Act, and b. it is the responsibility of the prosecutor, in conjunction with the person in charge of th e file to prepare victim impact statements. Title: Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines Date of Issue: July 2018 Security Classification Unclassified Version: 1.1 Review ed June 2024 Approved By: Chief Legal Officer Owner: Chief Legal Officer Page 10 of 16 Prosecutors should also act consistently with the Victims of Crime Guidance for Prosecutors , and the Victims Code , both of which explain prosecution responsibilities in further detail.9 9.6 Witnesses Any MBIE employee who is requested by a prosecutor or investigator to give evidence in support of a MBIE prosecution must attend Court and assist upon request. If the employee has any concerns regarding their safety, they should notify their manager and the prosecutor immediately. That way all parties can consider whether any steps may need to be taken to protect the witness (for example, giving their evidence in an alternative way e.g. by CCTV). An MBIE employee must give evidence in a prosecution that is not brought by MBIE if summonsed. It is the responsibility of that employee to inform their manager that they have been summonsed and to inform them of any potential risks arising out of the nature of the evidence that they may be required to give. Employees and managers are encouraged to seek advice from a prosecutor if they are concerned about the evidence required or the potential risks. MBIE employees called to give expert evidence in a prosecution must comply with the Code of Conduct for Expert Witnesses . For MBIE prosecutions, it is the responsibility of the prosecutor to ensure that the witness understands their obligations as an expert witness. 10 New information in the prosecution context 10.1 Investigators and other staff must provide any relevant new or previously undisclosed information to the prosecutor as soon as practicable. 10.2 MBIE has a continuing obligation to inv estigate potentially exonerating material if it comes to hand (and to disclose new information to the defence). 10.3 New information may also be relevant to the ongoing obligation to consider the propriety of a prosecution (see public interest test –above). 11 Conduct of prosecutions 11.1 Choice of prosecutor All MBIE prosecutions must be conducted by properly qualified legal counsel. Prosecutions may be carried out by in -house prosecutors or by Crown Solicitors or employees of Crown Solicitor firms under instruction fr om the relevant business unit. Crown solicitors may only undertake prosecutions for MBIE in the area for which they hold the Crown warrant .10 Some prosecutions cannot be undertaken by in -house prosecutors and so must be taken by Crown Solicitors, or in so me cases taken over by Crown Solicitors following a plea or case review hearing. These are ‘Crown prosecutions’ and are set out in the Crown Prosecution Regulations 2013. Where a matter is transferred to a Crown Solicitor as a Crown prosecution, the in -house prosecutor and investigator must ensure that the Crown Solicitor receives the full file and accompanying prosecution report. For all other prosecutions, the decision as to which prosecutor to use is made in accordance with the Legal Services Policy , but the table below sets out some situations when a Crown Solicitor may be instructed to lead or support a pros ecution.
8 Free and frank opinions 8shrvakdix 2020 -06-03 14:04:00
8 Section 404 of the Companies Act specifically requires any levies that are recovering costs across the Companies Office registry system to be set in regulations according to these three principles. It requires that they must be applied “having regard to the cost of administering the whole system of registers, not on the basis of the costs of administering individual registers .” 18 Figure 4: Principles and benefits of shared services A shared approach enables: An organisational structure and operating model, supported by legislative changes to introduce new levies, that produce economies of scale (meaning it is more cost -effective to operate a group of registers as one office rather than individually) in the delivery of registry services. Justified Any registers and functions to leverage off the existing business processes, technology, and infrastructure, minimising the overall cost. Efficient Users of smaller registers (registers with a comparatively low number of users) to benefit from a registry system that includes larger registers, so that fixed costs of providing registers are spread across more users. Equitable The Companies (Levies) Amendment Act 2022 amended the Companies Act to enable the Companies Office to collect levies from its users to recover shared services costs. A levy under the Companies Act allows for money to be collected from specified users of one register and be legitimately used to mee t the costs of operating any or all registers under one Companies Office registry system.9 Without introducing a specific levy to recover the costs of providing shared services, smaller registers would experience a significant, exponential increase in their fees. MBIE proposes that cost recovery is split between fees and lev ies under a mixed structure to give effect to these legislative changes , where : • a new levy would recover the shared costs of the registry system to more clearly identify the existing costs of providing shared services, charging them to the appropriate group of users at a fair amount ; and • fees would offset the remaining direct costs of providing specific registry services , offsetting the shared costs recovered through levies paid by specific users. This mixed cost recovery structure would sit alongside other levies that recover the cost of specific club goods, such as the existing Insolvency Practitioner levy and a proposed NZBN levy. Section 4 sets out the proposals for applying and setting the amount of each of the three levies . Figure 5 on the next page shows how the current fee -based cost recovery structure will be split across new and existing fees and levies. The overall type of costs, the type of charges that will recover those costs, and the approximate portion of revenue an d expenditure for each type of charge are easily identified.
8 The policy intent is to ensure that employees still have at least three weeks paid time of f work for each entitlement year (regardless of when they actually take it). 9 A closedown period is one period per year when an employee customarily closes their business operations or discontinues the work of one or more employees and requires the employee to take all or some of their annual leave entitlement. 10 Under the Wages Protection Act 1983 employers can include a general deductions clause in employment agreements enabling them to recover overpayments from an employee’s final pay in some circumstances. In addition to this, before an employer make s any specific deduction from an employee’s pay the employer must consult them before making a specific deduction and an employee must agree in writing.
8 c. Internationally, many policies and regulations are aimed at circular practices and have implications for New Zealand exporters There are approximately 40 national or trans -national level circular economy str ategies worldwide and more than 180 international legislative instruments. Governments have adopted circular approaches to address limited raw material availability and supply chain shock s, increase productivity and jobs, and address climate change and degenerating natural cap ital. A wide range of measures are used including bans, levies, taxes, minimum prices, standards, requirements for information on products, extended producer responsibility , procurement, grants and other regulatory and fiscal incentives . Policies focussed on upstream waste prevention and resource recovery are of growing interest and include incentives for circular design, repairability, and use of digital product passports and other measures to provide consumers with information about the origin , footprint , recyclability and life cycle of products. New Zealand is also among 175 countries that have agreed to develop a legally binding Global Plastics Treaty , including circular economy approaches to address plastic pollution. Most attention on emissions and climate change mitigation to date focus on the role of energy (largely scope 1 and 2 emission s). However, increasing attention globally is being paid to material and wider supply chain -related emissions (scope 3). A shift to a circular economy is a key part of reducing scope 3 emissions in material production and supply chains . Our trading partners’ circular economy transitions will likely have implications for some New Zealand exporters and our place in wider global trade fl ows. Circular economy objectives are reflected in the trade and economic policies of New Zealand’s top four trade partners: China, Australia, US and Japan, as well as in the UK, EU, and indications toward s this in India. There are explicit circular economy provisions in New Zealand’s recent Free Trade Agreements with the EU, UK, and the updated Closer Economic Relations ( CER) Sustainable and Inclusive Trade Declaration with Australia. Shared interest in working together on circular economy is part of the joint statement on California -New Zealand Climate Cooperation signed in July 2024. New Zealand will require ongoing awareness of international circular economy developments to make timely responses to opportu nities and risks , including wher e regulatory interventions may be needed . Failure to comply with international standards and practices may mean reductions in market access, additional trade costs, or loss of competitive advantage. Examples of international developments with implications for New Zealand include: 9 • changes to Australian sustainability and recyclability requirements which will need to be met by New Zealand exporters for Australia's 2025 Packaging Targets . • EU reporting and disclosure measures that will have implications for som e products placed on the market in the EU, including recyclability or recycled content requirements, labelling , eco-design, traceability, and product data . New Zealand has limited ability to influence design and manufacturing abroad. This makes strategic c ollaboration with trade partners on circular economy approaches important to mitigate risks of supply chain disruptions and market volatility. Government has roles through our information networks and trade relationships to monitor developments and support our exporter community to adapt to these global transitions. Source: International developments toward more circular economies and the implications for New Zealand
8  a clear process to follow to determine how much of an annual holidays entitlement needs to be used for a period of time away from work  a prescriptive test for determining an Otherwise Working D ay for FBAPS purposes  a clear definition of w hen a working arrangement is so ‘irregular and intermittent’ that an employee may receive their annual holidays entitlement as payment rather than as paid time off. 13. In addition to proposals for the calculation and delivery of annual holidays and FBAPS entitlements, the Taskforce has also made a number of other recommendations to address other issues with the Act. 14. While f urther detailed policy and design work will be required to finalise the precise detail s that will be required to implement these proposals , the recommendations in this report provide the structure and format of a revised system for determining, calculating and paying the statuto ry entitlements set out in the Act. Updating the Act to be i n line with modern legislative drafting principles w ill also help improve the Act (for example, through adding examples to illustrate particular points). 15. The Taskforce’s recommendations are summa rised in the table below and discussed in more detail in Section 6. Recommendations Theme Recommendations Payment for annual holidays and FBAPS leave 1. The greater of the following should be paid for the relevant period of annual leave: a. Ordinary Leave Pay ( base rate plus any scheduled overtime, allowance, commission and incentive payments) b. Average weekly pay for the last four or 13 weeks c. Average weekly pay for the last 52 weeks .  Each day (or part -day) of FBAPS leave should be paid based on the greater of: a. Ordinary Leave Pay b. Average Daily Pay
8% growth in Working Holiday Scheme visa holders.
8. Authorise the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety to make decisions, consistent with the Taskforce’s recommendations, on any issues that arise during the detailed policy design and drafting process
8. If Cabinet agrees to my recommendation to adopt the Taskforce’s recommendations, work will begin immediately on detailed policy design and the legislative drafting process. I have submitted a legislative programme bid for amendments to the Holidays Act with a Categor y 5 status (instructions to be provided to Parliamentary Counsel Office in 2020).
85. The Taskforce would like to hear from anyone who has proposals for changes to the Holidays Act. Please bear in mind that any proposals for change will need to reflect the criteria set out in the Terms of Reference for the review. The Terms of Reference states that: 86. ‘The Group is requ ired to develop, test and make recommendations to the Government on policy options for the provision of, and payment for, holiday and leave entitlements that: o continue to promote the existing purpose of the Holidays Act 2003 o provide clarity and certainty f or employers and employees so that employees receive their correct entitlements o are simpler than the current Act in relation to provisions of, and payment for, entitlements to holidays and leave o are readily implementable in a payroll system o minimise compliance costs for employers o minimise perverse incentives on employers and employees o ensure the balance of decision -making between employers and employees when it comes to requests for holidays and leave is appropriately calibrated o are readily applicable to the full range of working and remuneration arrangements in the labour market both now and in the future o aim to protect overall entitlements for employees ’. 87. Please consider these requirements when developing your suggestions for change . 88. You may wish to consider the following questions in developing your proposal. 16 Are the broad principles that underpin the Holidays Act (that entitlements are to be determined in relation to the work pattern at the time the leave is taken and that employ ees should not be financially disadvantaged by taking leave) still appropriate?
86% of rural houses and businesses having access to broadband peak speeds of at least 5Mbps (compared with 20% currently - the RBI objective was 80%)
8Are you aware of other cross -cutting issues with the design of the current Act? If so, what are they?
8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:06:16
8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:06:53 HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE Final Report OCTOBER 2019 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
9 E.g. t otal earnings in the last 13 weeks divided by the total number of hours worked in the last 13 weeks. 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:06:16
9 Free and frank opinions Free and frank opinions 8shrvakdix 2020 -06-03 14:04:00 Financial Implications
9 In your opinion, what are the main reasons that make the Holidays Act difficult to comply with for employers?
9 Information about making a complaint about MBIE’s compliance with the Victims’ Rights Act is available on the MBIE website at http://www.mbie.govt.nz/about/our -people/contact -us/victim -support -mailbox?searchterm=victim . 10 See letter from Deputy Solicitor -General to Crown Solicitors dated 18 August 2014 . Title: Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines Date of Issue: July 2018 Security Classification Unclassified Version: 1.1 Review ed June 2024 Approved By: Chief Legal Officer Owner: Chief Legal Officer Page 11 of 16 Reason Example To support MBIE’s capacity to provide services Insufficient staff within a particular district or area of regulation to meet needs Complex legal issues Likely to require complex advocacy with national implications High Profile Case is high profile with considerable media interest. This may be because of the defendant’s identity, international aspects, circumstances surrounding the case or the victims’ identity Independence from Ministry required When the case calls for independent advice or advocacy – for example; when there is a perceived or actual conflict of interest 11.2 Running of the case Once the decision to prosecute is made, accountability for legal issues in connection with the file passes to the prosecutor. The pr osecutor will consult the investigator or other person in charge of the file as to the conduct of the prosecution and keep them informed as to progress. In the case of Crown Prosecutions, once the Crown has assumed responsibility for an MBIE prosecution, all decisions are matters for the Crown Prosecutor to decide, in consultation with MBIE. All prosecutors acting on behalf of MBIE are required to comply with all relevant professional obligations, including the requirement to present the prosecution case f airly and fully, but not to strive for a conviction. The prosecutor must also keep the relevant manager and, for in -house prosecutions, the Manager Legal Services - Litigation, appraised of any significant developments in the file. “Significant developmen ts” include: a. developments that may affect the conduct of other prosecutions b. indications of media interest, or developments of which the Ministry may wish to alert the media and c. matters affecting resourcing for the prosecution. Except as otherwise instructed, the authority to accept, on behalf of MBIE any proposal for resolution of a prosecution remains with the prosecution decision maker, who must seek advice from the prosecutor. If the prosecutor thinks that a proposal may be m ade during a court hearing, he or she should discuss with the prosecution decision - maker what resolution would be acceptable before the hearing. In some cases, resolution proposals may also be made proactively by prosecutors, with the authority of the pr osecution decision maker.
9 Section 404 of the Companies Act , as amended by the Companies (Levies) Amendment Act 2022 . Questions for submitters on proposals for a mixed cost recovery structure: 1 What is your view on a mixed cost recovery structure of fees (for specific services) and levies (for fixed shared costs), and the types of costs allocated to fees and levies ? 2 Are there any other options you would like to see considered to recover shared costs from users? 19 Figure 5: Current and proposed mixed cost recovery structure
9 Theme Recommendations and a more detailed definition should be provided for when PAYG can be used because a work pattern is ‘intermittent or irregular’. 7. An employer ’s ability to require employees to attend work under an availability provision should be suspended from the end of the last shift the employee works before their leave period until the start of the first shift they work on their return from leave. 8. The following definition of ‘gross earni ngs’ should be used for leave payment calculations: an employee’s leave payment should reflect all cash payments received, except direct reimbursements for costs incurred’. FBAPS leave entitlement 9. FBAPS leave should continue to be held in days . 10. Eligible e mployees should be entitled to bereavement leave and family violence leave from the first day of employment. Eligible employees should be entitled to one day of sick leave from their first day of employment, with an additional day per month of employment u ntil the full entitlement of five days is reached after four months. 11. Employees should have the ability to take sick leave and family violence leave in units of less than a day on a proportionate basis for time and pay with a minimum amount of a quarter of a day. 12. There should be a new test for which employees are eligible for sick, bereavement and family violence leave. 13. A new prescriptive methodology should be used to determine whether a day is an O therw ise Working Day for an employee for FBAPS purposes. 14. The list of people for whom bereavement leave applies should be extended to include a more modern understanding of family members. 15. Provisions relating to transferring public holidays should be amended to reduce the chance of employees being disadvantaged by t he transfer. Other proposed changes 16. The Taskforce was unable to reach a consensus view in relation to establishing an additional public holiday (e.g. for Matariki). 17. Closedown provisions should be amended to provide greater transparency and certainty for employees. In addition, the requirement that holidays are paid out at 8 per cent and an employee’s anniversary date is reset should be removed (although it should still be possible for anniversary dates to be reset by agreement). 18. On the sale and transfer of a business, employees should have a choice about whether to transfer all of their leave entitlements to the new employer or have them paid out and reset. 19. Record keeping requirements should be updated to reflect changes to how leave entitlements are held, calculated and paid. 20. Employers should be required to provide payslips to employees in every pay period. 21. Issues that cause non -compliance with the current Act should be considered in the design of the compliance and enforcement mechanisms to support any revised Act .
9 Theme Recommendations and a more detailed definition should be provided for when PAYG can be used because a work pattern is ‘intermittent or irregular’. 7. An employer ’s ability to require employees to attend work under an availability provision should be suspended from the end of the last shift the employee works before their leave period until the start of the first shift they work on their return from leave. 8. The following definition of ‘gross earni ngs’ should be used for leave payment calculations: an employee’s leave payment should reflect all cash payments received, except direct reimbursements for costs incurred’. FBAPS leave entitlement 9. FBAPS leave should continue to be held in days . 10. Eligible e mployees should be entitled to bereavement leave and family violence leave from the first day of employment. Eligible employees should be entitled to one day of sick leave from their first day of employment, with an additional day per month of employment u ntil the full entitlement of five days is reached after four months. 11. Employees should have the ability to take sick leave and family violence leave in units of less than a day on a proportionate basis for time and pay with a minimum amount of a quarter of a day. 12. There should be a new test for which employees are eligible for sick, bereavement and family violence leave. 13. A new prescriptive methodology should be used to determine whether a day is an O therw ise Working Day for an employee for FBAPS purposes. 14. The list of people for whom bereavement leave applies should be extended to include a more modern understanding of family members. 15. Provisions relating to transferring public holidays should be amended to reduce the chance of employees being disadvantaged by t he transfer. Other proposed changes 16. The Taskforce was unable to reach a consensus view in relation to establishing an additional public holiday (e.g. for Matariki). 17. Closedown provisions should be amended to provide greater transparency and certainty for employees. In addition, the requirement that holidays are paid out at 8 per cent and an employee’s anniversary date is reset should be removed (although it should still be possible for anniversary dates to be reset by agreement). 18. On the sale and transfer of a business, employees should have a choice about whether to transfer all of their leave entitlements to the new employer or have them paid out and reset. 19. Record keeping requirements should be updated to reflect changes to how leave entitlements are held, calculated and paid. 20. Employers should be required to provide payslips to employees in every pay period. 21. Issues that cause non -compliance with the current Act should be considered in the design of the compliance and enforcement mechanisms to support any revised Act . 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
9. A disproportionate number of public service employees work in two of the sectors m ost likely to receive an increase in leave payments due to the variable working arrangements and complex remuneration structures of employees.4 There are also likely to be cost pressures for Government -funded services provided through private sector empl oyers.
9. Note the authorisation sought under recommendation 8 includes authority to make decisions on updated compliance and enforcement mechanisms to support the new Holidays Act regime (such as the functions and powers of labour inspectors), provided these do not deviate significantly from mechanisms in current employment legislation
9. Spectrum Allocation 1) The Crown will allocate to the MSE to be held for the benefit of all Māori at no cost 20% of all future Commercial Spectrum allocations that are allocated using the Management Rights regime , or any regime that might in the future replace the Management Rights regime . 2) To avoid doubt , future commercial allocation refers to allocation of any new spectrum and renewal of existing spectrum. 3) The MSWG note and accept that not all spectrum is managed via Management Rights and not all Management Rights are created for commercial purposes. 4) The following are excluded from the arrangement set out in this MOU: a) Grants of radio licences for general use and for individual use on a first- come, first -served basis. b) Management Rights that are sub- licenced by the Crown for local or sub -national services. c) Broadcasting licences for sound and television which have been granted to Māori organisations including iwi and Te Mātāwai at the time of this MOU and which are subject to separate agreements , but only to the extent that those separate agreements remain valid and in force. 5) Appendix B: Process for f uture spectrum transfers and renewals sets out the process agreed by the parties for determining the specific details of spectrum transfers and renewals . 6) Within twelve months of signing this MOU, the Crown will agree to allocate to the MSE to be held for the benefit of all Māori, at no cost, spectrum as set out in Appendix C: Initial spectrum allocations to the Māori Spectrum Entity .
96.3% of invoices were paid within 10 working days, up 0.2% in the previous quarter. This is the best result ever reported to date for this initiative.
98.5% were domestic users.
: (within NZ): 0800 843 697
: Building foundations for the future.
: First Thursday of each month, alternating each month between 7.30pm and 1pm
: PROs will always aim to maximise the long-term benefit to New Zealand. While the emphasis will shift to commercialisation and delivering economic outcomes, PROs will still need to deliver critical public good knowledge and services.
: PROs will deliver to government priorities for science, innovation and technology.
: PROs will look for opportunities to coinvest in research capability, facilities and knowledge production.
: The 2025 work programme and interpreting calls
: The National Interest Risk Review draws from the information in the TCIEU and allows relevant agencies to review potential risks associated with a permit (e.g. risks related to international relations or national security ). The impact and likelihood of the risk occuring is considered, as well as any appropriate mitigating factors (e.g. whether risk could be reduced by attaching conditions to the payload permit).
: Thursday, 1 May, 7.30pm
: Transparency between public funding and activity in PROs, with appropriate cost recovery models.
: formed by bringing together the National Institute for Water and Atmospheric Research (NIWA) and the Institute of Geological and Nuclear Sciences Limited (GNS Science), and noting that Cabinet agreed-in-principle for NIWA to acquire MetService as a wholly owned subsidiary. This PRO will foster economic and environmental resilience in New Zealand through sustainable resource use, energy innovation, climate science and effective hazard mitigation. The process for the NIWA acquisition of MetService will continue as planned.
: general updates from MBIE in policy areas.
: opportunities for funding through SSIF programmes and infrastructure.
: opportunities for funding through the Commercialisation Partner Network and the PreSeed Accelerator Fund.
: opportunities for science funding for international partnerships and the Catalyst Fund.
: updates and information from MBIE on the reforms to the science innovation and technology sector.
: with mechanisms to prioritise, avoid unnecessary duplication, resolve trade-offs and support consistency and coordination within and between PROs.
A $10 million Local Activation Programme for programmes that were free to the public in town centres, venues and locations across Auckland, such as events organised by business associations, community groups, and cultural organisations.
A 5G INFORMATION PACK FOR MEDIA 1What is 5G, and how does it use radio waves? What is the difference between ionising and non-ionising radiation? Radiation is split into two broad categories: ionising and non-ionising. Non-ionising radiation doesn’t carry enough energy to “ionise”, or strip electrons from atoms and molecules, and therefore it does not have enough energy to damage our DNA. The radiation emitted from radios, mobile phones, phone towers and Wi-Fi routers (RF radiation) is non-ionising. The nature of this kind of radiation, and the way it interacts with the body, is quite different to ionising radiation like x-rays. The New Zealand Radiofrequency Exposure Standard sets maximum exposure limits for the public to protect Kiwis of all ages. For more information on the New Zealand Standard, see page 3 of this pack.1G – 1981 2G – 1992 3G – 2001 4G – 2011 5G – 2020The electromagnetic spectrum has a variety of uses in New Zealand and internationally, including for radio and cellular mobile technology. Devices and equipment like computers, radios, mobile phones, phone towers and Wi-Fi routers emit electromagnetic radiation. Cellular networks use dedicated radio spectrum frequencies for the connection between the cell site and the handset (cell phone). 5G is simply a new application of radio technology Releases of new cellular mobile technology have occurred approximately every decade since the 1980’s. The next (fifth) generation (5G) is expected to be a significant step up from 4G networks in terms of speed, capacity and operational flexibility. The initial plan for the 5G roll-out is that it will use frequencies similar to those used by current mobile phones. In the future, higher frequencies around 26 GHz will become available, enabling even faster data transfer. These frequency bands have been used for household appliances, communications and radar for over 60 years. More information about the frequencies for 5G is available on page 2 of this pack. Very low frequencyM illimetre wavesInfrared5G 3G, 4G 1-10 GHzVisible UltraViolet X-Rays Gamma Cosmic RaysRadio frequency spectrum VLF SHF EHF LF/MF/HF/VHF/UHF 3KHz 30KHz 30PHz 300GHz 3EHz 300EHz 430-750THz NON-IONISING IONISING 2How does 5G work and why is access to radio spectrum frequencies so important? ȓC ellular networks use dedicated radio spectrum frequencies for the connection between the cell site and the handset (cell phone). The government allocates these frequencies when new technology or demand arises. Each radio service is allocated a frequency to prevent it interfering with other services. ȓT he government has announced that the 3.5 GHz band will be the first spectrum allocated for 5G. ȓM obile network operators will use a combination of frequency bands to provide 5G services including the 3.5 GHz band and other bands they already have access to. ȓH igher frequencies around 26 GHz (sometimes referred to as millimetre waves or mmWaves) will be introduced later for 5G services, especially where high data rates or capacity are needed. Millimetre waves have been widely used for many years for point-to-point communication links. ȓT here is a common misconception that higher frequency signals are more harmful. In fact, the most important parameter when it comes to exposure to radio waves is the intensity of the radio wave. Exposures from 5G cell sites will be similar to those from the current technologies. However, if there is high demand in a particular area then more sites will be installed. Because each site will be serving a smaller area, they will operate at lower power which will have the effect of lowering exposures compared to 3G and 4G technology. ȓT he frequencies to be used by 5G cell sites and devices are similar to those that have been used by existing technologies for many years, and are covered by the limits in New Zealand Radiofrequency Exposure Standard. (more information on the New Zealand Standard is provided on page 3 of this pack). Standards New Zealand coordinates the process to develop and review a New Zealand Standard such as this, which includes convening expert committees and undertaking public consultation on draft standards. You can find out more about Standards New Zealand here: www.standards.govt.nz What does the government do to protect Kiwis from harmful radiofrequency exposure? There are a number of government agencies and local bodies involved in the roll out of 5G in New Zealand. The responsibilities of these agencies and local bodies include setting regulations for the NZ telecommunications industry to operate within, allocating radio spectrum for network operators to use for 5G, monitoring research into health effects, and setting radiofrequency exposure limits for the public. ȓC onsenting and monitoring the development of infrastructure (land use and environmental emissions controls) – MfE, LG ȓN ational direction and environmental standards for telecommunications facilities – MfE ȓE nvironmental health monitoring and compliance – MoH, LG ȓR ecommending health standards – MoH ȓMon itoring research into non- ionising radiation – MoH ȓO ccupational health – MoH, MBIE ȓS etting rules for telecommunications operators – MBIE ȓS upporting telecommunications infrastructure development and operations – MBIE ȓI ndustry standards and codes of practice – MBIE ȓC onsumer protections – MBIE ȓP roduct compliance framework – MBIE – R-NZ Standard – radio products R-NZ – electrical and electronic products ȓC onsumer advice – MoH, MBIE ȓA llocating rights to spectrum – MBIE ȓM anaging spectrum use, licensing and compliance monitoring for interference management – MBIE ȓR epresenting NZ and providing inputs to international radiocommunications, regulations and standards – MBIE Radio SpectrumOperators Consumers Management / SpectrumEnvironment & Health MfE – Ministry for the Environment MoH – Ministry of Health LG – Local councils (territorial authorities) MBIE – Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment 3More information about the agencies and bodies involved in 5G ȓT he Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) is responsible for establishing the telecommunications regulatory environment, including setting the rules within which the telecommunications companies operate and the product compliance framework. MBIE is also responsible for making frequency bands available for new uses, including bands for the 5G network. You can read more about MBIE’s roles here: www.mbie.govt.nz/science-and-technology/it-communications-and-broadband/ and here: www.rsm.govt.nz/business-individuals/buying-electrical-and-electronic-products-in-new- zealand/what-to-look-for-when-youre-buying-a-product/ ȓM BIE has laid the groundwork preparing for 5G through industry workshops and has run a public consultation process to discuss 5G spectrum bands and their future allocation. MBIE is also working with interested parties on technical and regulatory issues relating to 5G. ȓA ll radio transmitters in New Zealand must either be licensed by a radio licence, spectrum licence or general user licence, or have an exemption from licensing. MBIE oversees this licensing process. Details of individual spectrum licences issued for each radio transmitter are searchable in a public register, the Register of Radio Frequencies: www.rrf.rsm.govt.nz/smart-web/smart/page/-smart/WelcomePage.wdk ȓT he Ministry of Health is responsible for expert advice on health effects from electromagnetic fields and closely monitors international research, including the frequencies expected to be used for 5G technologies. This includes recommending exposure limits for the New Zealand Radiofrequency Exposure Standard (NZS2772.1). You can read more about their role here: www.health.govt.nz/our-work/environmental-health/non-ionising-radiation ȓT he Ministry for the Environment is responsible for regulatory controls under the Resource Management Act (RMA) 1991, including the National Environmental Standards for Telecommunications Facilities (NESTF). You can read more about their role here: www.mfe.govt.nz/rma/national-direction/national-environmental-standards/national-environmental-standards ȓL ocal government’s role is to implement and enforce the national direction for telecommunications facilities through policies and plans under the Resource Management Act 1991. The Resource Management (National Environmental Standards for Telecommunication Facilities) Regulations 2016 (NESTF) require that all cell sites, including those that use 5G technologies, comply with the standards. This includes the New Zealand Radiofrequency Field Exposure Standard, which set maximum exposure limits for the public. Ensuring products and equipment are safe ȓT here’s a range of international and Australia/New Zealand standards that the telecommunications industry adheres to, to ensure the products and equipment they are using are safe. ȓI n New Zealand, all network providers rolling out a 5G network must comply with the Resource Management Act (RMA) 1991, including the National Environmental Standards for Telecommunications Facilities (NESTF). These regulations include compliance to the New Zealand Radiofrequency Field Exposure Standard which sets maximum exposure limits for the public. The current NZ exposure standard already covers 5G. ȓT he limits in the exposure standard are more than 50 times lower than the levels at which adverse effects might occur. These limits protect people of all ages, including children. ȓT he exposure standard’s limits are recommended by the International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection, which the World Health Organization recognises for its independence and expertise in this area. The Commission has reviewed and reaffirmed these limits periodically (most recently in 2017). It bases any changes to them on the findings of health research, and not the requirements of telecommunications or other industries. Many countries (including Australia, Canada, France and Germany) use exposure limits similar to those in NZ. ȓE xposures from 5G transmitters will be similar to those from the current technologies. However, if there is high demand in a particular area, more sites will be installed. Because each site will be serving a smaller area, they will operate at lower power which will have the effect of lowering exposures. ȓW hen a mobile network operator proposes a new cell site, they must submit pre-commencement reports to the local council to show that the requirements in the NESTF and the exposure standard will be met for each cell site covered by the NESTF. This includes taking into account exposure from other telecommunications facilities in the vicinity as well. If the report shows that the cell site will generate exposures at or above 25% of the public exposure limit, further reporting to the local council is required. If a facility or network operator cannot comply with requirements in the NESTF, the proposed facility will be “non-complying”. ȓC hecks that telecommunications equipment comply with the exposure limits are carried out by mobile network operators (in line with joint standards referenced in the NESTF). ȓI nformation on the cell sites in your area can be obtained from your local council. 4 How different is 5G infrastructure from 3G and 4G? The key difference with 5G compared to previous generations of mobile technology is that 5G will normally use beam-forming antennas. However, beam-forming is already used to a limited extent by some 4G sites. See below for more detail on how a beam-forming antenna operates: Conventional antenna Conventional cell site antennas (for example those currently used for 3G and 4G) produce a single fan shaped beam covering a sector about 120 degrees wide. Regardless of where the receiving device is (for example, a person using their cell phone in their home), the radio beam is sent to the entire area served by the antenna. Beam-forming antenna The difference with a beam-forming antenna is that it produces a larger number (say, 48) of narrow beams that are directed to a small area. This means that instead of covering the entire area with the beam, it is targeted to the receiving device in use. BRM 5296 5Monitoring health research to keep everyone safe ȓ 5 G is simply a new application of radio technology. Existing research on the possible health effects of radiofrequency fields applies as much to 5G as to any other radio system in use. ȓ T o keep up to date with research, the Ministry of Health convenes an expert advisory committee, known as the Interagency Committee on the Health Effects of Non Ionising Fields. The Committee meets every six months and provides the Director General of Health with high quality, independent scientific and technical advice. The Committee has considered the issue of 5G deployment and has concluded there is nothing in the latest research that would indicate the need to change current policy settings relating to the health effects of radio waves. ȓ I n addition, the Ministry participates in a World Health Organization project to assess the health effects of electromagnetic fields. ȓ A t this point there is no indication that exposure to radiofrequency from cellular mobile technology exceeds guidelines or will do so once 5G is implemented. ȓ F or more information please see the latest Ministry of Health 5G factsheet here: www.health.govt.nz/system/ files/documents/topic_sheets/5g-and-health-aug19.pdf ȓ T he Ministry of Health has also produced an expert Q & A on 5G available here: www.health.govt.nz/your- health/healthy-living/environmental-health/radiation-environment/cellsites-and-5g/5g-questions-and-answers ȓT he Ministry of Health has also produced an addendum to the Interagency Committee on the Health Effects of Non-Ionising Fields: Report to Ministers 2018, providing advice on 5G radiofrequency fields. This is published on the MoH website alongside the 2018 report to Ministers here: www.health.govt.nz/publication/interagency-committee-health-effects-non-ionising-fields-report-ministers-2018 ȓF or further information about 5G, including 5G and health, the Office of the Prime Minister’s Chief Science Advisor has created an information sheet ‘5G in Aotearoa New Zealand’ that you can download here: https://www.pmcsa.ac.nz/our-projects/hot-topics/5g-in-aotearoa-new-zealand/
A Bachelor of Astronomy may help you understand how radio telescopes work
A Bill to amend the Building Act 2004 has been introduced to Parliament. This captures the first phase of proposed changes in the building law reforms that were publicly consulted on in 2019, and announced by the Minister for Building and Construction in October.
A Child Protection Policy is required for organisations providing government-funded services to children and families.
A Critical Minerals List for New Zealand
A Digital Technologies ITP Partnership Board was established to support the ongoing implementation of the ITP, made up of a diverse group of representatives from industry bodies, sector leaders and government.
A Fair Pay Agreement Working Group was set up in June 2018 to make recommendations on the design of a sector-level bargaining system. It was chaired by Rt Hon Jim Bolger ONZ.
A Mineral and Petroleum Resource Strategy
A Minerals Strategy for New Zealand to 2040
A Minerals and Petroleum Resource Strategy (2019)
A National State of Emergency was declared on Tuesday 14 February 2023, local territorial authority and Civil Defence and Emergency Management (CDEM) groups managed the response to the weather event in their respective areas.
A New Zealand Income Insurance Scheme [PDF 297KB]
A New Zealand Income Insurance Scheme could play a significant role in better protecting workers and incomes, matching skills with where they are needed, and helping communities and industries during economic shocks and transitions.
A Repairability Index was introduced in France in 2021. This was able to be quickly introduced to market in part because its methodology requires manufacturers of products to provide their own repair rating. The rating currently covers a range of five electrical and electronic products, which will be expanded over time.
A Spotlight Series where small business owners who have recently transformed their business by becoming digital can share their experiences with other small business owners.
A Steering Group with an independent chair will provide oversight of the Review.
A Tax Incentive is now available to businesses conducting eligible research and development in New Zealand.
A Technical Capability and Intended End Use (TCIEU) document is produced by MBIE officials based on relevant information from the application materials. It is presented in an accessible format for interagency consultation. This information includes: mission and purpose; country of jurisdiction; altitude and inclination; technical capability of the payload (i.e. physical dimensions, primary system, power subsystem, communications, attitude control, propulsion, remote sensing); and intended end use of the payload.
A caller sends a text message to a relay assistant through the NZ Relay application on their mobile phone or tablet. The relay assistant then relays the message verbally to a standard phone user and texts the spoken reply to the caller to read.
A caller signs with an NZSL interpreter on Skype, the interpreter relays the message verbally to a non-NZSL user over the phone, and then signs the reply to the caller.
A caller speaks directly to another phone user using TTY equipment. A relay assistant then types the spoken reply to the caller to read.
A caller speaks with a specialist relay assistant using both Skype, to provide visual cues, and a regular phone. The relay assistant then relays their message to a standard phone user.
A caller types a message to a relay assistant through the NZ Relay website. The relay assistant then relays the message verbally to a standard phone user and types the spoken reply to the caller to read.
A caller types their message to a relay assistant using TTY equipment. The relay assistant then relays their message verbally to a standard phone user and then types the spoken reply to the caller to read.
A caller with a speech impairment can speak with a specialist relay assistant using their own voice or a synthesizer. The relay assistant then relays their message to a standard phone user.
A caller with a speech impairment can type a message to a relay assistant using TTY equipment. The relay assistant then relays their message verbally to a standard phone user, who then speaks directly to the caller.
A charter doesn't impose an extra obligation on core agencies to carry out system assessments. Core agencies expect existing accountability processes and proactive self-assessments are sufficient.
A charter summarises how the system is intended to perform so that risks and gaps in the system can be identified quickly in system assessments and other types of regulatory system monitoring.
A circular diagram shows the five integrated themes and outcomes of the New Zealand-Aotearoa Government Tourism Strategy, centred around enriching New Zealand-Aotearoa through sustainable tourism growth. These are:
A circular economy and bioeconomy can tackle climate change and lift economic value
A circular economy is based on 3 principles, driven by design:
A clearly defined long-term vision, to which the community and stakeholders are committed, with an agreed understanding of what success looks like, is critical to ensure all parties are heading in the same direction.
A co-governance approach is the best format for New Zealand tourism operators to contribute to, shape, and benefit from a stronger data and information system. The aim is for the tourism sector to be better placed to:
A co-regulation licensing regime for insolvency practitioners
A consultation document is published on our website outlining the proposed changes to the regulations and inviting written submissions. The submission period runs for around four weeks. If you have any queries about the consultation process, please contact MBIE.
A cross-government inter-agency working group provides advice on the implementation of the work programme.
A culture of thinking outside the box, and a science system that supports knowledge intensive firms.
A daily allowance for living expenses
A demonstrated strong commitment to their principal field of studies and to interdisciplinary work, and
A diversion agreement over an illegal gold mining operation at Millers Flat, Otago has delivered a resolution that benefits all parties, including reparation to the local community.
A djust the rules for taking, allowing and requiring AL and for ‘cashing up ’
A djusting the policy decision regarding the treatment of leave entitlements in restructuring situations : G iving effect to the existing policy decision , that all employees should have a choice about whether to transfer all of their leave entitlements to the new employer,
A draft critical minerals list for New Zealand
A draft minerals strategy for New Zealand to 2040
A duty has been introduced in the Adventure Activities Regulations requiring operators to have processes in place to communicate the risks associated with an activity to prospective participants (lifting risk communication duties to the level of regulation and providing for a fine if operators do not meet this requirement).
A duty of good faith requires parties to a contract not to mislead or deceive one another.
A dynamic business environment fostering innovation and international connections.
A filtered search to all the documents stored on the MBIE website.
A four-week notice period and four-week payment, at 80% of salary, from employers
A free NZ Relay app for mobile phones and tablets is available to download from the App Store and Google Play Store. This app can be used to make and receive text relay and captioned relay calls, using mobile data or a Wi-Fi connection.
A full list of our investment funds
A further 3 students from the same round were chosen for the Autumn NASA Internship period from September to December 2019, and given prestigious New Zealand Space Scholarships to attend. Follow the video journeys of their unique projects and experiences there.
A further six months of financial support from the scheme, at 80% of wages or a salary
A general synthesis of all the evidence (eg, human epidemiology and animal studies) leads to the conclusion that there is a cause-effect relationship in a broad sense and in terms of general common sense.
A geographical indication (GI) identifies a product as originating in a region, area or locality where its quality, reputation or other characteristic is attributable to its geographical origin. The characteristics of the product must depend on the geographical place of production.
A globally-connected economy, with agreements in place for technology transfer and research collaboration.
A guide to just transitions
A high-performing health and safety regulatory system contributes to our goal of healthy, safe and fulfilling work for all New Zealand workers, and to grow New Zealand for all.
A joint statement on the U.S. - New Zealand Space Dialogue
A key focus for our interest in APEC is the Human Resources Development Working Group (HRDWG).
A key focus of the Just Transition programme was to ensure that regions were activated and supported to plan and manage the social, economic, and environmental impacts of a transition. A successful transition was where regions could identify and then act upon new opportunities and manage the impacts in a way that was fair and just.
A key focus of the Strategy is more inclusive employment outcomes. This is supported by a series of action plans that focus on improving outcomes for groups that consistently experience poor employment outcomes. There are 7 employment action plans, which seek to improve labour market outcomes for:
A launch facility is a fixed or mobile facility or place from which launch vehicles are intended to launch and which includes all other facilities necessary to launch a launch vehicle. Licences are only required for facilities in New Zealand; they are not required for New Zealand launch facilities abroad.
A launch vehicle is any vehicle which reaches or is intended to reach outer space, or which carries, supports, or is intended to carry or support the launch of a payload. Licences are required for launches that occur in New Zealand and for New Zealand launches that occur overseas.
A letter includes envelopes, packets, packages or wrappers for which a charge is made to carry it, take charge of it, or send it.
A letter is defined in the Postal Services Act as any form of written communication or document or article addressed to a specific person or address. It must not be conveyed by electronic means or by a courier service.
A list of datasets we have created
A list of organisations involved in New Zealand-Aotearoa's tourism industry.
A literature review that examines key definitions, concepts and measurement approaches about 'resilience' as a backgrounder for policymakers and others interested in the topic.
A major policy programme in 2013 implemented the recommendations of the Royal Commission, through the:
A member of our commercial team may also reach out to you via a phone call to verify this information if required.
A minor adjustment was made to the main port price from 1 July 2018 to ensure that prices changes adequately reflected retail price change in Auckland following the introduction of the Auckland regional fuel tax. From October 2006 onwards, main port prices have been adjusted for the increased prevalence of discounting activity (through loyalty schemes, shopper coupons and regional discounting) to produce the discounted price.
A modern regulatory regime for a safe, sustainable and thriving space industry.
A national register of self-contained vehicles is hosted by the Plumbers, Gasfitters and Drainlayers Board. The register enables local authorities and the public to verify whether a vehicle is certified as self-contained.
A new applied doctorates scheme to be introduced in 2024 aims to create more impactful science and better prepare more researchers for the wide range of careers outside of academia, such as in industry, Crown Research Institutes, iwi organisations and local councils.
A new dedicated 0800 number and web form to make it easier to report migrant worker exploitation.
A new gateway test that businesses can use when responding to a claim that a person is an employee and not a contractor.
A new model for clinical trials in New Zealand
A new visa to support migrants to leave exploitative situations quickly and remain lawfully in New Zealand. This visa will be valid for up to six months.
A non-refundable application fee of $95 (including GST) is payable at the time of your application.
A number that is a multiple of 3 is unchanged
A number that is not in a or b is rounded to the nearest multiple of 3 two-thirds of the time, and to the next nearest multiple of 3 one-third of the times. For example, 10 will become 9 two-thirds of times, and will become 12 one-third of times.
A package of energy sector discussion documents
A patent is an exclusive right granted for new inventions for a period of up to 20 years. To get a patent, technical information about the invention must be disclosed to the public in a patent application. IPONZ is the government agency responsible for granting patents.
A people trafficking awareness-raising resource for government and the community, including what trafficking is, where you might see it, indicators and who to call for help, is under development by the Inter-Agency Trafficking Operations Group. Expected to be published end of 2022 and disseminated early 2023.
A postal identifier may be a name, logo, stamp, postmark or other label or mark that can be as simple as a rubber stamp bearing the postal operator's name.
A practical guide to getting into circular economy
A printable PDF version is below.
A printable card that people who may need language assistance services can show to help them use government services. The card has fields where you can write your name and the language you speak, and the MBIE website address for language assistance services.
A printable poster and brochure for people to indicate which language they use.
A promising new cancer treatment is entering a phase 2 trial coordinated by the Malaghan Institute of Medical Research, proving New Zealand is an ideal testing ground for clinical research in CAR T-cells and other immunotherapies.
A proposed building consent exemption for small standalone dwellings, commonly known as 'granny flats', of up to 60 square metres in size will now cover small standalone dwellings of up to 70 square metres.
A purchase order number (PNXXXXXX) if you have received a purchase order from us
A purchase order will be required prior to supply of some goods and services. Your MBIE contact will send you a Purchase Order using the email address you have provided us. If you are provided with a purchase order number, you must reference this on your invoice.
A pyramid diagram shows some key factors of the visitor experience. At the top of the pyramid is hero experiences, followed by supporting themes and experiences, then accommodation, attractions, hospitality, retail, events and conferences, and at the base of the pyramid are supporting infrastructure, amenities/services, policies/regulation. Sitting along the sides of the pyramid are capability, innovation, investment and organisational structures/institutions.
A quarterly update of labour market statistics, providing an overview of the current state of the labour market.
A range of government agencies have an interest in space and advanced aviation.
A range of legislative, operational, and regulatory changes will be made to transform performance across the system.
A range of levy-rated technical policy proposals to improve fairness were also confirmed by Cabinet, these are detailed below and in Regulatory Impact Statements included at the bottom of this page.
A recent 2 year review of ANZSRC was led by a project comprising the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE), Stats NZ, the
A redirector page has been set up without anywhere to redirect to.
A refreshed industry strategy in response to COVID-19
A regulatory charter is a management tool designed to support a living regulatory system and reinforce its shared ownership for those with regulatory functions.
A report and summary slides are available here for download:
A report on the critical barriers, enablers and approaches needed for a more circular economy in Aotearoa New Zealand by 2050
A report on the impacts of circular approaches on emissions, jobs, and other factors
A requirement to provide a pay statement in each pay period to provide greater transparency about leave and pay for employees.
A review of the financial reporting framework led to the Financial Reporting Act 2013 which sets reporting requirements for businesses and registered charities.
A review of the trafficking victim certification process to ensure it is still fit-for-purpose, whilst started, was not completed in 2022.
A roadmap for hydrogen in New Zealand
A satellite office is located at the Hawke's Bay Business Hub, providing business development assistance.
A screen sharing session can only be undertaken with your express verbal agreement. By continuing you acknowledge that:
A significant function of the centre will be to join up existing food safety science and research to make the best use of New Zealand and international resources. The centre will also link to and collaborate with the international science community and related international research platforms.
A single methodology based on guaranteed hours would simplify the Bill, reduce compliance costs and obligations, and provide certainty and clarity to both employers and employees. The benefit of using actual rather than guaranteed hours is a subjective assessment . If an employee’s hours of work vary significantly from their guaranteed hours , using guaranteed hours would mean an employee uses more entitlement for a part week of AL compared to if actual hours were used, but that would translate to higher pay for the pa rt week of AL . The employee would be under no legal obligation to work on days that are not agreed days of work .
A six -month timeframe is aligned wit h the current entitlement timeframe but is longer than the four-month period recommended, reducing the impact on employers. The proposal also responds to feedback from MBIE’s working group that the multiple accumulation points for different employee groups would be complex to administer in practice by including fewer accumulation points.
A small proportion of Pacific migrants come to New Zealand as international students, making up three percent of all student visas approved in 2016/17. The number of Pacific student visa approvals has been consistent over the last five years, decreasing by five percent.
A strategy to support the growth of our space and advanced aviation sectors
A summary of indicators that describe how Aotearoa New Zealand is performing in terms of Good Work [PDF 678KB]
A summary of insights arising from the research programme is available:
A summary of select data and featured actions as at June 2022.
A summary of submissions and feedback received during the 2024-25 consultation on the proposed subject of MBIE and MFAT Joint Long-Term Insights Briefing.
A summary of submissions is available on the consultation page:
A summary of submissions to the Proposed changes to the International Visitor Conservation and Tourism Levy discussion document.
A summary of the proposals in the New Zealand income insurance scheme.
A summary of these suite of reports is available:
A system that encourages increased investment in low emissions technologies, and
A table overview of the New Zealand Screen Production Rebate policy criteria for the 5% Uplift.
A telecommunications service obligation (TSO) is established through an agreement under the Telecommunications Act between the Crown and a TSO provider.
A tiered dispute resolution system supports parties to resolve issues that may arise, including access to mediation and facilitation.
A total of 454 completed responses were received in 2017, equating to an overall response rate (excluding ineligible responses) of 31%.
A total of 75,578 student visa holders were present in New Zealand on 30 June 2017. This was 1% less than the year before. The main contributor to this decline was a decrease of 3% in the number of new student visas approved in 2016/17.
A trade mark enables businesses to distinguish their products or services from similar products or services offered by competitors. The main purpose is to create a distinctive and preferably memorable brand that customers associate with quality products or services.
A tripartite Taskforce was established to suggest improvements to the Holidays Act 2003 9. The Holidays Act 2003 (the Act) sets out the minimum entitlements to holidays and leave, and payment for them, that employers are obliged to provide to their employees. Its purpose is to promote balance between work and other aspects of employees’ lives by providing minimum ent itlements to annual holidays, public holidays, and sick, bereavement and family violence leave.
A vision for hydrogen in New Zealand
A wide range of digital twins in development or early-stage use in New Zealand were identified in the research. Most twins are of cities, buildings, or infrastructure, often developed by councils, to enable efficient design, planning and management of resources and assets. Sector-oriented R&D programmes include forest, vineyard and orchard twins to support sustainable and productive growing systems. These current uses are consistent with circular objectives for resource efficiency.
A wide range of opportunities were identified for circular economy approaches to contribute to emissions reduction and wider impact in New Zealand. The report presents these in detail, assessing their likely benefits and limitations.
A work programme that will achieve our vision.
A3 Summary - The future of business for Aotearoa New Zealand
ACC Claimants who disagree with a decision made by ACC are able to have the decision reviewed by an independent reviewer.
ACC and MBIE Briefing Paper: Appendices A, B and C
ACC and MBIE Briefing Paper: Improving ACC's dispute resolution processes, including ACC's response to the Independent Review of Acclaim Otago's report
ACC and MBIE Briefing Paper: update on the response to the Miriam Dean Review and next phase of work to improve disputes performance
ACC considered it was acting lawfully in charging the interest. Potential legal issues were identified when ACC proposed to consult on setting a method in regulations for calculating a debit interest charge to be included in instalment plan fees.
ACC is required under section 148 of the Accident Compensation Act 2001 to award to claimants some of the cost of taking the review, where the independent reviewer makes a decision fully or partly in favour of the claimant, or considers the claimant has acted reasonably.
ACC is required under section 324A of the Accident Compensation Act 2001 to conduct a biennial review of the Cost of Treatment Regulations.
ACC levies are set every 3 years. In any given year, levies are intended to be equivalent to the lifetime cost of rehabilitating those who are injured in that year. This excludes the cost of claims made by non-earners (which are government funded) and investment returns.
ACC mainly pays for the Accident Compensation Scheme (AC Scheme) from accounts funded by levies, which ACC collects from New Zealanders including businesses (employers, self-employed, contractors, and shareholder-employees).
ACC uses a retrospective approach to assess how market activity has affected the cost of treatment and rehabilitation. ACC also works with the sector to identify areas for improvement as part of the decision-making process. If you would like to share your suggestions on what could be improved, please contact ACC.
AEWV Dashboard [PDF 733KB]
AI, machine learning, and advanced computing
APEC Energy Working Group
APEC Fossil Fuel Subsidy Reform Peer Review
APEC Policy Partnership on Science, Technology and Innovation.
APP 400: Additional Key Persons for Technical Capability Details
APP 800: Additional Overseas Authorisation Details
ASPIRE 2023 Nomination Form
ASPIRE prize: Inclusive science, technology and innovation for a resilient and sustainable environment
ASTRO 200G Astrobiology - The University of Auckland
Abbreviations and glossary
Ability to take AL in advance during a closedown period
Ability to take AL in advance during a closedown period:
About Better for Business
About Long-term insights briefings
About copyright and trademark issues
About international regulatory cooperation
About our research and data
About the Accident Compensation Review Costs Regulations
About the ILO and its role
About the MethaneSAT space mission
About the Taskforce and Advisory Group
About the earthquake-prone building system review
About the tourism forecasts
About the work health and safety regulatory system
About third-party fundraisers
Above the left end of the arrow, there is the heading:
Accelerate recovery by targeting investment in priority portfolio markets and segments.
Accelerating Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency consultation
Accelerating building projects with self-certification and inspection targets
Access a range of consumer research and reports commissioned or undertaken in recent years.
Access a range of tourism research and reports commissioned or undertaken in recent years.
Access previous national and regional international tourism forecasts dating back to 2010.
Access the HAV licence application form here:
Access the payload permit application form here:
Access to and around a region/destination is a key enabler. It can either accelerate or hinder visitor growth.
Access to the data used in this study was provided by Stats NZ under conditions designed to give effect to the security and confidentiality provisions of the Data and Statistics Act 2022. The results presented in this study are the work of the author, not Stats NZ or individual data suppliers.
Accession to the United Nations Convention on Registration of Objects launched into Outer Space [PDF 558KB]
Accident Compensation (Interest on Instalments and Unpaid Levies) Amendment Bill
Accident Compensation (Interest on Instalments) Amendment Act
Accident Compensation Corporation
Accident compensation dispute resolution review
Accident compensation regulatory system
Accommodation Association
Accommodation Data Programme
Accommodation Data Programme (ADP)
Accommodation Survey (July 1996-September 2019)
Accountability of a dispute resolution scheme
Accountable for MBIE meeting its obligation under this policy.
Accounting reforms in 2014 and 2015
Accreditation Employer Interim Reporting - July 2023 [PDF 702KB]
Accredited Employer Programme Changes
Achieving and measuring success
Achieving financial capability is a powerful tool in enhancing overall economic prosperity and wellbeing. One way to achieve financial capability is through the uptake of financial capability programmes. However, even though highly successful, Pacific-centred financial capability programmes have been available, uptake of these programmes by the community has been low.
Achieving the vision for tourism
Acknowledging our mistakes and listening to feedback.
Act . Our proposals are intended to
Act 1992 . If so, state when .
Act unaffected by Cabinet decisions.
Action Plan for Pacific Education 2020 to 2030
Action toward this end may take various forms:
Actions to support the Strategy
Active Debris Removal and On -Orbit Servicing Missions: Operational Policy Issue/Version Control Version Date Amendments V1 10th May 2023 Initial Issue
Active Debris Removal and On-Orbit Servicing Missions: Operational Policy [PDF 211KB]
Actively championed by leaders
Activities Bill [PDF 625KB]
Activities eligible for a pre-assessed activity licence.
Activities funded by the RTBF will be delivered between April and July 2025 and will target Autumn/Winter visitation. It is expected this will mean a strong focus on the Australian market. Successful proposals can build on existing activities or deliver new activities.
Adaptable and responsive to government
Adaptation and global markets
Addendum to the 2020 Regulatory Impact Statement on proposed changes to the Holidays Act 2003.
Additional Employment Protections for Security Officers Under Part 6A: Approval to Draft [PDF 162KB]
Additional costs of proposed approach compared to taking no action Regulated parties (employers and employees ) Increased ongoing costs for some employers due to :  ‘gross earnings’ definition  new payment methodologies  removal of the ‘paid parental leave override’  earlier availability for some types of leave  new bereavement leave definition  updated record keeping and payslips requirements One-off costs for many employers to upgrade to a new payroll system. $310.3 per year for Option One Low Regulators (Labour Inspectorate) One-off costs to operationalise the new requirements and upskill staff, provide initial education services, update guidance and tools and respond to questions after implementation. Possible on -going costs related to increased enforcement and compliance activity. Approx. $10.5 million (2021/22 to 2024/25) for Option One. Medium Wider governm ent Estimated costs to government as an employer included in the ‘Regulated parties’ estimates Low Other parties One-off costs to payroll providers to upgrade their systems. This is expected to be greater for Option Two, but cannot be estimated at this time. Low 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:06:16
Additional information for applicants, suppliers and vendors
Additional options for complainants
Additional record-keeping requirements to ensure employers have the data required to accurately complete the calculations and tests.
Additional resource to establish a comprehensive identification and support system for victims of trafficking is still required. INZ will continue to research and scope this work, which will include exploring options for funding.
Additional resources may be required to support the development and implementation of the plan; therefore, the process needs to be cognisant of central and local government planning and funding cycles. DM should aim to provide continuity of activity across both political and planning cycles, to provide confidence for stakeholder commitment and investment.
Additionally , NZSA may : + assess the ODMP using the latest DRAMA or DAS software to verify compliance with regulation 13; or + arrange an independent assessment of the ODMP by a suitably qualified entity , such as ESA .
Additionally, employers retain an obligation to remediate employees for historical underpayments that have occurred due to non-compliance with the current Holidays Act.
Addressing temporary migrant worker exploitation
Addressing temporary migrant worker exploitation [PDF 2.1MB]
Addressing the exploitation of migrants is a priority for the New Zealand Government.
Addressing zero hours contracts and other practices
Addressing zero hours contracts and other practices regulatory impact statement
Addressing zero-hour contracts
Adjustments to fees (where required)
Adjustments to the Climate-related Disclosures Regime - summary of discussion document
Administrators of financial benchmarks
Adopting a DM approach enables communities and destinations to respond to changing conditions and determine the type of tourism they would like to have and the benefits they would like to receive, taking an active role in managing these.
Adoption of circular practices in buildings, agriculture/food, and manufacturing would provide emission savings over time and have impacts for productivity, jobs and supply chain resilience.
Advanced Energy Technology platform
Advanced International Law (LAWPUBL 403)
Advanced aviation (including aerosciences, autonomous flight systems, and air traffic management)
Advancing our understanding of flooding in New Zealand
Adventure Activities - keeping it safe: Consultation brochure [PDF 569KB]
Adventure Activities - keeping it safe: Consultation document [PDF 1.5MB]
Adventure Activities - keeping it safe: Summary of proposals [PDF 1.5MB]
Adventure activity operators must obtain a safety audit by an accredited safety auditor and be registered by WorkSafe as an adventure activities operator in order to offer their activities.
Advice on options for pro-rating sick leave for inclusion in the exposure draft Bill.
Advice on proposed reductions to the New Zealand Trade and Enterprise Budget [PDF 231KB]
Advice on the transitional provision for the personal grievance income threshold [PDF 605KB]
Advice provided to the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety on the possible policy direction of legislation to address modern slavery and worker exploitation across domestic and international operations and supply chains. Modern Slavery Leadership Advisory Group established, meeting four times in 2021. Includes representatives from business, unions, and civil society.
Advice to the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety on the possible policy direction of legislation to address modern slavery and worker exploitation across domestic and international operations and supply chains. This includes potential obligations to prevent breaches of employment standards in domestic operations and supply chains.
Advising agencies Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment Decision sought Improving the Holidays Act 2003 Proposing Ministers Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety
Advising on economic development and tourism policy, and managing major events and tourism funds
Advising on labour market policy, immigration policy, management of international components, workplace relations and safety policy and accident compensation policy.
Advising on science, innovation, investment and biotechnology policy
Aerospace technologies are essential to the day to day functioning of our country, enabling navigation and communication, security and defence, environmental monitoring, disaster response and recovery, weather forecasting, and natural resource management.
Affected parties (identify) Comment : nature of cost or benefit (eg, ongoing, one -off), evidence and assumption (eg , compliance rates), risks Impact $m present value where appropriate , for monetised impacts; high, medium or low for non-monetised impacts Evidence certainty (High, medium or low)
Affordability and opportunity:
After 2023, the Commerce Commission may recommend to the Minister for Digital Economy and Communications that:
After adjusting for changes in prices, real growth from 2010 was estimated at 7.2%.
After considerable research, it was decided to adopt the National Accreditation Authority for Translator and Interpreters (NAATI) system of interpreter standards and associated accreditation for those doing interpreting work in the New Zealand Public Sector.
After consultation, the Minister will bring the proposals to Cabinet and any approved changes to Schedule 2 will be taken to the Executive Council through an Order-in-Council process.
After the consultation, we will provide advice to the Government which will be considered at Parliament, along with text of the Forced Labour Protocol, 2014.
After the submission period closes, MBIE reviews and summarises the submissions before providing final recommendations to the Minister along with a regulatory impact analysis. The Minister then provides recommendations to Cabinet for its approval.
Agencies who commit to the charter are obliged to self-assess algorithms they use to deliver their services to identify the level of risk associated with the algorithm. This will help us to prevent the perpetuation of bias, protect privacy, and ensure alignment with the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi.
Agencies, policies and budget initiatives
Agency disclosure statement
Agency disclosure statement ........................................................................................................ 2 List of Acronyms ................................................................................. Error! Bookmark not defined. Executive summary ...................................................................................................................... 4 1 Status quo and problem definition ........................................................................................ 6 2 Objectives .......................................................................................................................... 10 3 Options and impact analysis ................................................................................................ 12 4 Consultation ....................................................................................................................... 17 5 Conclusions and recommendations ..................................................................................... 18 6 Implementation plan .......................................................................................................... 18 7 Monitoring, evaluation and review ..................................................................................... 19
Agenda for the Future of Work Tripartite Forum - 22 March 2021 [PDF 279KB]
Agenda for the Future of Work Tripartite Forum on Climate Change - 28 June 2021 [PDF 120KB]
Agenda for the Future of Work Tripartite Forum on Good Work and Workplaces - 27 June 2022 [PDF 205KB]
Agenda for the Future of Work Tripartite Forum on Just Transitions - 19 September 2022 [PDF 35KB]
Agenda for the Future of Work Tripartite Forum on just transitions - 28 March 2022 [PDF 270KB]
Agenda for the Future of Work Tripartite Forum, 27 July 2020 [PDF 123KB]
Agree Discuss Note that we are continuing to work on the details of the criteria and mechanism
Agreement between the European Union, of the one part, and New Zealand, of the other part, on the participations of New Zealand in Union programmes [PDF 189KB]
Agreement between the Government of New Zealand and the Government of the United States of America on science and technology cooperation contributing to domestic and external security capabilities [PDF 124KB]
Agreement between the Government of New Zealand and the State of Colorado on cooperation on science, innovation, technology and space.
Agreement between the New Zealand Government and Rocket Lab Ltd New Zealand and Rocket Lab USA Inc (Sept 2016)
Agreement for scientific and technological cooperation between New Zealand and United States [PDF 1.2MB]
Agreement on scientific and technological cooperation between the European Community and New Zealand [PDF 1.9MB]
Agreement relating to science, research and innovation cooperation between the Government of Australia and the Government of New Zealand [PDF 52KB]
Agreements have were signed with Inspire.net, Gisborne.net, Chorus and Araneo to connect 57 remote schools and their surrounding communities with fast wireless broadband.
Agreements were signed with Chorus and Vodafone and include:
Agritech, Construction & Digital Technologies
Air NZ on board with new climate change research
Aircraft Maintenance Engineering (Certificate or Diploma)
Airspace Integration Trials
Alexandra is completing a PhD in Mechanical Engineering at the University of Canterbury, with a research interest in neuromorphic engineering.
Algorithm charter for Aotearoa New Zealand
Algorithms are used at MBIE for one or more of the following reasons:
Algorithms at MBIE: Transparency and accountability for our algorithm use
Alison Marris Manager, Employment Standards Policy Labour, Science and Enterprise , MBIE 28 / 03 / 2024
Alison Marris Manager, Employment Standards Policy Labour, Science and Enterprise, MBIE 21 / 12 / 2023
Alison McDonald, Deputy Secretary Immigration New Zealand
Alison McDonald, Deputy Secretary, Immigration
Alison Stewart, Foundation for Arable Research (FAR)
Alison brings a wealth of operational leadership experience from public service in New Zealand and the United Kingdom. She arrived in New Zealand in 2013 and spent 3 years at Te Kawa Mataaho (formerly the State Services Commission) where she was the Deputy Commissioner for Performance Improvement. She went on to become Director of the Customs 2020 transformation programme, before taking up the role of Deputy Chief Executive Services for Children and Families (South) at Oranga Tamariki in 2017.
Alison leads Immigration New Zealand, which provides stewardship of the immigration system to facilitate and protect New Zealand's interests. It aims to deliver outstanding immigration services, bringing the best people to New Zealand to make it prosper.
Alison was made an Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in 2008 for her work with Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs.
All Graduates Interpreting and Translating
All Graduates apply best practice and use the latest technology to deliver services. Their in-house development team offers extensive IT integration capabilities tailored to client needs.
All Graduates are committed to making communication with Culturally and Linguistically Diverse (CALD) communities easy and accessible. All Graduates develop trusting and mutually rewarding relationships with their interpreters and translators, and the public service, and together deliver a gold standard to CALD communities.
All MBIE employees, contractors and consultants must meet the standards of behaviour set out in the:
All New Zealanders can participate in employment with opportunities to fulfil their needs and aspirations
All agencies generally entitled to purchase services under collaborative contracts (e.g. central government departments, crown entities and local government authorities) are eligible to join this contract.
All building work in New Zealand must meet certain requirements to achieve safe, healthy, durable homes and buildings. These requirements support our goal to grow New Zealand for all.
All components of the package concluded on 4 July 2022 and successfully supported the wellbeing of Aucklanders while stimulating economic activity.
All data sharing is assessed to be compliant with the Privacy Act 2020 and specific legislative information sharing provisions. This ensures the data shared is accurate, reliable and securely stored to facilitate providing powerful trusted data, improving customer service offerings and ensuring MBIE is empowered by data.
All employees are required to have a formal agreement in place if they are to work remotely, including working from home for more than two days per week on a recurring basis. This includes completing available wellbeing, health and safety assessments with employees who are working remotely in New Zealand.
All employees in New Zealand have minimum employment rights that their employer must meet.
All formal Flexible Working arrangement requests, acceptance and decline rates and reason will be recorded by People and Culture.
All funding applications are assessed by a panel that makes recommendations to the Tourism Minister or MBIE Chief Executive (or their delegate) as appropriate.
All nominees should meet the following criteria:
All occupation groups experienced falls in online job advertisements, with the Labourers occupation group seeing the largest annual and 5-year decline.
All of Government procurement - Part 1 of 4 [PDF 1.2MB]
All of Government procurement - Part 2 of 4 [PDF 5.7MB]
All of Government procurement - Part 3 of 4 [PDF 3.7MB]
All of Government procurement - Part 4 of 4 [PDF 4.9MB]
All of government approach to online financial scams
All organisations would be required to take action if they become aware of modern slavery or worker exploitation
All payloads considered on a case-by-case basis
All postal identifiers must be registered with us, and available for public inspection as part of the register of postal operators.
All prosecution decisions must be recorded as set out in the
All published research outputs in scope of the policy must be listed in annual and final reports, as required by the applicable funding agreement for the project. The list of research outputs must include a permanent DOI or URL link for the research output.
All roles are treated as flexible unless there is a genuine business reason for a role not to be. Flexibility is equally available to women, men, and gender diverse employees, irrespective of the reason for wanting it. Working flexibly does not undermine career progression or pay.
All telecommunications providers must help fulfil interception warrants (or use ongoing statutory authority). In addition, a smaller group of network operators must pre-invest in the necessary equipment and technical resources to carry out interceptions over their networks.
All the latest Science and Innovation news stories as well success stories from previous funding rounds.
All the products in the top blue section moved into the Stage II where they were further assessed.
All the quarterly data series are no longer being seasonally adjusted. Users are recommended to do annual comparisons to avoid seasonal effects.
All unadjusted data in the above Excel files is available in this consolidated file:
All-of-Government Approach to Online Financial Scams [PDF 207KB]
All-of-Government Employment Strategy and Youth Employment Action Plan
All-of-Government Employment Strategy and Youth Employment Action Plan: Minute of Decision
Alliance turning waste into $100m boost to the New Zealand economy
Allow Labour Inspectors to issue an infringement notice where employers fail to provide requested documents in a reasonable timeframe.
Almost $1.8 billion has been invested in UFB infrastructure to ensure as many New Zealanders as possible can experience the social and economic benefits of faster broadband.
Almost all advisers had worked with at least one INZ office in the last three months. They had mixed views of the experience of dealing with INZ offices, with offshore advisers more positive than onshore advisers. Generally, advisers were most positive about how they were treated by staff (over 60%), and least positive with regard to accessing and getting help when needed (48%). Improved communication was the most frequently citied suggestion to enhance the experience of dealing with INZ offices.
Almost half (45%) of Pacific student visa holders were approved for study at primary and secondary schools, followed by 33% at universities and polytechnics.
Almost half of Pacific approvals for residence were under the
Almost half of the workers approved come from Vanuatu.
Alongside WorkSafe New Zealand, we work to achieve this through these main pieces of work.
Alongside this programme, other rural broadband options are available from private network operators.
Also called Tourism Satellite Account (TSA), this data shows the impact of tourism on the economy in terms of expenditure and employment
Also consulted on was a preliminary proposal to require full and final claims liability settlement for all AEs in the Full Self Cover (FSC) plan. However, given the lack of support this will not proceed. Instead, ACC will shortly consult AEs on a revised proposal for full and final settlement only when an Accredited Employer chooses not to renew their AEP accreditation or has their accreditation terminated.
Alternative dispute resolution services play an important role in Aotearoa New Zealand. One major aim is to achieve better coordination and greater consistency in dispute resolution approaches.
Alternative energy research projects awarded funding
Alternatively you have the right to seek a review of the response by the
Although New Zealand remains a non-associated third country participant in Pillar 1 and Pillar 3 of Horizon Europe, there are still many possibilities for New Zealand researchers to be involved. These will mostly fund New Zealand researchers to work internationally, although there are some cases where researchers can be supported to work in New Zealand.
Although most reported good health and generally positive non-economic outcomes in New Zealand, a number of their outcomes on these dimensions grew worse over their first 3 years after residence approval. The reasons for these declines are not wholly clear and could be investigated in future research.
Although the government does not own or operate any telecommunications networks, it is committed to improving connectivity for the benefit of all New Zealanders. Becoming a leading digital nation will only be possible through the combined efforts of the government and telecommunications industry.
Although these factors are listed as possible considerations, the national interest, and what would be contrary to it, is not defined in the Act. Instead, the Act grants the Minister broad discretion to decide on a case-by-case basis whether granting a payload permit would be contrary to the national interest. This approach has advantages over a more rigid test, that, for example focussed on certain payloads or payload classes. This ensures that the Act is an enduring piece of legislation that can easily respond to changes in the global risk environment, both on Earth and in space, and government priorities.
Amazon Series Memorandum of Understanding for the 5% Uplift
Amend the local fibre companies constitutions to align with Chorus
Amending the Gas Act 1992
Amendment Regulations 2024
Amendments to the Electricity Safety Regulations to expand the permitted voltage range for electricity supply
Amendments to the Gas Act 1992 in 2021 ensure the Act is fit-for-purpose for regulating the disclosure of security of supply risks, and that penalties are robust.
Amendments to the Immigration Act 2009 are to ensure that immigration is managed in a way that balances the national interest, as determined by the Crown, and the rights of individuals (as per Section 3 of the Act).
Amendments to the regulations will lower the risk to power lines from trees that are outside the GLZ. The changes will also:
Amenities, services and infrastructure
Among those migrants whose last student visa ended between July 2006 and June 2012:
Among those migrants whose last work visa ended between July 2006 and June 2012, 24% remained in New Zealand on a resident visa while 75% were not in New Zealand 5 years later.
An HAV is any vehicle that travels, intends to travel, or can travel to higher than flight level 600 or the highest upper limit of controlled airspace under the Civil Aviation Act 1990 (linked below). This may include aircraft, balloons, and sounding rockets. Licences are required for HAVs in New Zealand; they are not required for New Zealand HAVs abroad.
An IR330C if Withholding tax needs to be deducted (schedular payment) or an Exemption Certificate if exempt from withholding tax deductions. This includes offshore entities who provide services in NZ.
An RSAB is an omnibus bill (a bill that amends more than one piece of legislation) introduced with the approval of the parliamentary Business Committee under Standing Order 267(1)(c).
An alphabetical list of all community languages.
An analysis of the spending patterns of international visitors to New Zealand from 2013 to mid-2018.
An earlier report, which MBIE commissioned from Sapere Research Group in 2016, estimated the economic impact of the development of a rocket launch industry in New Zealand:
An effective safety case will give operators the ability to manage the public safety risks they create without the constant need to seek authorisation from the Minister to make changes. It is for this reason that the safety case should be presented as a robust argument rather than a summary of the safety system (any changes to the safety system should not automatically result in a requirement to amend the safety case). Satisfying the Minister of Changes There may on occasion be a need to amend the safety case. Operators should consult MBIE to determine whether or not a variation may be required. Operators may do so at any stage, however must not implement any proposed variations to the safety case until the Minister is satisfied that they have considered the risk to public safety resulting from those changes and that sufficient assurance has been provided that public safety risks can be managed. Any variation to the safety case must be applied for in writing, with the amendments clearly identified, the rationale for the changes explained and a suitable risk assessment completed. Examples of when operators might need to apply for a variation to the safety case include: ȓ the nature of activities have changed in such a way systems required are not adequately reflected that the risk to public safety has increased and the in the safety case; and/or resources or systems for managing the risk are no ȓ a variation is required to ensure compliance with longer appropriate; your public safety duties and the requirements ȓ the methodology and systems for managing risk are of the Act and its regulations. no longer appropriate and the new methodology and Operators do not need to apply for a variation where minor administrative corrections (such as grammar, spelling or punctuation) are made, however they should ensure that MBIE is provided with the current version of the safety case. Applicants should have a suitable document control system in place to ensure that obsolete material is appropriately removed from service, and that only current material is being operationally implemented. Formatting and Structure Applicants should ensure that the safety case is legible, set out in a clear and logical manner and is easily understood (written in plain English). It should be submitted to MBIE in an electronic format (either MS Word or searchable .pdf document). The commitment to public safety must be evident. The size and complexity of the document will be dependent on the type of operations are undertaken and the public safety risks that operations present. The Minister may seek to verify the commitments made in the safety case by evidencing components of the safety management system. 8 9 Contact Details Any questions please contact the New Zealand Space Agency directly. Freephone (within New Zealand) 0508 843 697 (THENZSPACEAGENCY) 0800 843 697 (THENZSPACEAGENCY) For overseas callers +64 9 952 1663 Email nzspaceagency@mbie.govt.nz Website www.mbie.govt.nz/space
An effective standards and conformance system makes it easier for consumers and businesses to make informed decisions. The Government, consumers and the community rely on standards and conformance to protect public health, safety and the environment.
An employee is no longer on an existing employment agreement if they move to a new employer, or they shift to a new role within the same employer. However, if the employee shifts to a new role with the same employer as a result of a restructure, the transitional period will still apply.
An employer and employee agreeing to new terms and conditions within an employment agreement (unrelated to the threshold) will remain covered by the transitional period. For example, if an employer and employee agree to vary the employment agreement to change hours of work or work location, the transitional period will continue to apply.
An employer may also agree to leave in advance of accrued entitlement but does not have to approve a request . An employer must allow an employee to take AL within 12 months after the date on which the employee’s entitlement arises . Following the employee’s first 12- month employment anniversary date: Within each 12- month period an employer must not withhold consent to an employee taking four weeks of accrued AL entitlement (if an employee has it
An employer may also agree to leave in advance of entitlement arising, but does not have to approve a request . An emp loyer must not unreasonably withhold consent to an employee’s request to take any AL entitlement that they have accrued during employment (this reflects the C abinet policy decision on pro- rata leave in advance).
An employer will be able to choose whether to make a deduction in response to a partial strike. If they decide to do so, the Bill requires the employer to provide written notification about the deduction to employees.
An estimated 8.5% of the material flowing into the economy ends up as waste in landfill, with less than 1% of materials recovered, indicating a low level of recovery through recycling or composting.
An evaluation of the framework will be completed to inform consideration of future legislative changes to the AC Act.
An exposure draft of the Regulations was released for public feedback in December 2019. We received 53 submissions in total and a number of minor changes have been made in response to the feedback.
An image of a horizontal double ended arrow going left and right.
An implementation period between the da te the Bill receives Royal assent and the date on which it comes into force will be required to support a smooth transition to the new rules.
An important aspect of the Kitmap project was not only to understand what infrastructure we have, but also how it is accessed and used. This includes who uses the infrastructure, how they get access to it, and how it is maintained. Information about access to infrastructures is also a key input for the future Kitmap online tool.
An inclusive and consumer-focused energy system
An independent insight-driven analysis of trends and opportunities to further develop cycle tourism and to increase its value to communities across New Zealand has been completed.
An independent review into the AEWV was announced by the Minister of Immigration in August 2023.
An innovative and modern energy system that creates new opportunities for business and consumers.
An insight into budget initiatives, research organisations, the Vision Matauranga Capability Fund Policy and the Science Board.
An installation is specified as 1 of 2 categories depending on the impact the installation method has on the property that neighbours share. Each category has a different consent requirement:
An integrated Destination Management approach
An interim replacement to Monthly Regional tourism Estimates (MRTEs) that provide insights into monthly tourism spend
An introduction to copyright protection and laws in New Zealand.
An introduction: which provides the rationale for regulating space activities from New Zealand, key features of the existing regulatory regime, and the approach to the statutory review.
An overview of our tools for drilling into up-to-date labour market data is available on our
Analysis of proposals for determining the levy portion that should come from plug-in hybrids and battery electric vehicles.
Analysis of proposals on motorcycle groupings and cross-subsidisation.
Analysis of proposals on removing the No Claims Discount product and amending the Experience Rating product.
Analysis of proposals regarding new Classification Units for home improvement stores and sports and physical recreation.
Analysis of proposals to integrate a financial incentive for motorcycle rider training into the vehicle licensing system.
Analysis of the adventure activities regime
Analysis on decisions to support the package of reforms to modernise the Companies Act.
Analysis on proposals to set debit interest rates for Work levy payers who opt to use a payment plan, and to amend the interest on late levy payments to ensure compatibility between the two rates.
Analysis supporting the in-principle agreement for NIWA to acquire MetService.
Anastasia is a machinist at a forestry mill that has gone into liquidation, and one of 150 workers laid off.
And actually, as we've done the engagement here, we realised that one of the things which really accelerates digital twins is the incorporation of AI and predictive analytics into it. And the potential there is to get round some of the problems of different datasets and different standards. But actually New Zealand is in a really good place to lead that and we've thought that as we've gone through the work that we've done so far. So really it is over to you to see if you think that we can make New Zealand at the forefront of this. It is already perhaps at the forefront in many ways, but how do we drive that forward and be the best.
And before we go to questions, we've got some examples here. Just to tell you this, this is real. It's not just hypothetical, it's happening. I'm going to go through these quickly for the sake of time. So some of these are kind of imagined digital twins or real digital twins.
And then of course if there are any changes in there we have to agree with any stakeholders we can virtually show them and that should be able to help make the change easier.
And then one last thing. This is really a push for New Zealand. So on the next 2 slides there, I don't expect you to pick it up. But it's basically just showing the timeline of digital twins. And the amount of interest is building over time. It's almost like a momentum this building. I haven't put in figures here, the attendance figures for each of these events as they get bigger and bigger as more and more people are interested in the potential for a digital twin. But you can see there's been annual summits being held and partnerships created and challenges developing. And on the next slide it really shows in 2023 it's picking up even more. We have Digital Twin Partnership New Zealand launching as an industry group. And Infrastructure Commission recommending an investigation and the Construction Sector Accord.
And then right at the start I mentioned, you could have a digital twin of a living thing. Well, this is this is quite close to that in terms of, we're looking at a digital twin of the hydrology in a forest, and obviously that's more and more important now with flooding and managing floods.
And then we've got the Wellington digital twin, here, where I'm not going to go into detail on that one. But obviously, Wellington City already has a digital twin for some areas of use for utilities, etc.
And then, it's a very rapidly moving simulation, as we get to the end of the useful life of the building. I'm hoping this is the end of the century, but we don't know for sure how things will develop. But what we've got is basically a material bank from the digital twin, we know all the materials in the building, we know all the equipment in the building. We can probably use online platforms to find really good sales for any materials that are there for any product, some of them might want to go back to the original manufacturer, we've got all that information. So we can maximise whether it's wood, or it's concrete or steel or any other material or some of the digital equipment, we can actually get the best value for it. Not only that, while we're in this process, we can actually see for insurance purposes and for depreciation, for any kind of accounting thing. We can see what the buildings actually worth at any point in time and our views.
And what we've assumed is that the people that are in the design phase or developing this are going beyond using Building Management information systems and digital engineering. And they're thinking actually, because we've got a complex here, that's got multi users and a lot of different moving parts, a digital twin would be a really good way to manage this and ensure we get cost efficiencies. We can try out things before we actually do them in the virtual environment. We can test out things and so they're seeing the benefit, developers are seeing the benefit of the potential for digital twin and this complex that they're trying to create. And again, we're seeing efficiency savings.
And you can imagine for facilities management we're going to have lots of opportunity to manage things with sensors, etc. We mentioned mobile apps software as a service, we can connect into that general trend and we can interact with it. Online training platforms - when it comes to the end of the life, I think those are going to be very useful because as we get through the use phase, we're going to be selling off materials that we're not using anymore. And those platforms provide a market for that. Digital passports. These are coming from materials and products, the European Union's pushing them they're becoming a thing. When we've got more information like that we can slot that into digital twin and we could build it. I mentioned 3D printing, and of course digital engineering .
Anna Pollock, Founder of Conscious Travel
Anna is the Recipient of The Visionary of the Year Award from the Canadian tourism industry. She has also undertaken seminal work in many aspects of tourism, notably in education, sustainability and technology. She created the first internet-based tourism strategy for Scotland and co-developed one of the first multi-purpose destination management systems.
Anna's current work focuses on the application of systems thinking and regenerative principles to the tourism sector.
Annex 1: Information requirements for licence and permit applications Proposed information requirements
Annex 1: Measures and indicators
Annex 1: Mitigating overvoltage from generation at the inverter
Annex One: Summary of decisions to date 2324- 2225 1 Summary of Cabinet decision Intent behind decision Key refinements agreed by previous administration Annual leave – see Annex Two for further proposals Retain weeks as the unit of entitlement. Avoid potential disadvantages to employees that moving to a different unit of entitlement may cause but provide prescription and clarity about calculations and processes. N/A Introduce a prescriptive method for determining the use of annual leave entitlement. Provide clarity about what constitutes a week for each employee, so employers no longer have to rely on their judgement to determine what constitutes a week for employees with variable hours or work cycles that are different to 7 days. • Simplify the method for determining the use of annual leave entitlement based on average hours to reduce costs and complexity for employers , so it is based on average hours worked on all days of work over the previous 13 weeks (instead of on that specific calendar day) . • Adjust recommended audit requirement as this would be costly and time consuming for employers. • Clarify that in certain circumstances an employer and employee may agree to the employee using a whole week of annual leave for a seven -day period without work. Introduce a new payment method for annua l leave so it is paid at the greater of three calculations: Ordinary Leave Pay, Short Run Average Weekly Earnings and Long Run Average Weekly Earnings. Provide a clear method for employers to accurately calculate annual leave payments. • Specify how new payment methods should apply in other areas that specify rules for paying for annual leave (annual leave in advance, when employment ends, when annual leave is cashed up, closedowns). • Align when payment for annual leave must be made with common practice, so the default is to pay annual leave in the pay that relates to the period during which it is taken (and the alternative is to pay annual leave before it is taken). Introduce 13- week reference periods as the basis for Short Run Average Weekly Earnings calculations and calculations to determine the use of leave entitlements (also relevant for FBAPS leave below). Provide a reference period shorter than 12 months that can be used across multiple calculations. • Provide some flexibility around the exact number of weeks included in 13- week reference period calculations, to prevent payroll systems from having to split pay period data. Replace current Relevant Daily Pay and Ordinary Weekly Pay calculations with Ordinary Leave Pay (also relevant for FBAPS leave below). Provide a clear calculation that does not require employers to use judgement and discretion like Relevant Daily Pay and Ordinary Weekly Pay do currently. • Clarify the payment types that must be included in the Ordinary Leave Pay base rate. • Reframe Ordinary Leave Pay as a weekly and daily rate, to enable it to be applied to annual leave and FBAPS leave in a way that is clear and logical within the framework of the new legislation. Clarif y the pay ment types that should be included in gross earnings - all cash payments an employee received, except direct reimbursements for costs incurred. Make the definition of gross earnings easier for employers to understand and comply with. • Clarify that the status quo exceptions to the payment types included in gross earnings continue to apply. • Exclude redundancy compensation payments because they have not been ‘earned’. • Clarify that only payments that were earned over 13 weeks or less need to be included in the Short Run Average Weekly Earnings calculation , to prevent overinflation . Pro-rate annual leave in advance. Prevent employers from being able to unreasonably withhold consent to an employee’s request to take annual leave in advance on a pro- rata basis, and also prohibit employers from requiring employees to take leave of this nature. • Clarify that employers may choose to record the amount of pro- rata leave in advance available to an employee, but that they are not required to do so. Introduce a clear set of parameters around the ability for employees to use Pay-As-You-Go (PAYG) . Provide clarity about when an employee is eligible to receive PAYG, and increase the threshold for this, to ensure it is not used inappropriately. • Refine criteria to determine whether an employee is eligible to use PAYG , to clarify parts of the original proposal that were unclear. Require employers to give employees written notice regarding closedown periods and other periods in which work is dis continued , and allow employees to take annual leave in advance during a closedown period. Provide certainty and transparency for employees about their rights and employers’ obligations when establishi ng a new closedown period or having a n existing closedown period, and r emove complexity of the current requirement s for employees who are not entitled to annual leave at the time of a closedown . • Clarif y that employers must also continue to give employees 14 days’ notice of specific closedown dates and the annual leave arrangements that will apply, as per the status quo. • Specify the process for establishing a new closedown, as this was not clear in the original proposal. Family violence leave, bereavement leave, alternative holidays, public holidays, and sick leave (FBAPS leave) – see Annex Three for further proposals Retain days as the unit of entitlement. Avoid potential disadvantages to employees that moving to a different unit of entitlement may cause but provide prescription and clarity about calculations and processes. N/A Provide employees the ability to take sick leave and family violence leave in part days (with a minimum amount of a quarter of a day) . Align legislative requirements with common practice among employers , increase flexibility for employees, and prevent employees’ sick leave and family violence leave entitlements from being deducted at a rate that does not reflect their use ( currently an • Provide employees the ability to take bereavement leave and alternative holidays in part days , as this is also common practice among employers and will increase flexibility for employees. • Remove the minimum amount of a quarter of a day, so actual hours of work and time off work are always recorded and paid as such. employer could deduct a full day of sick leave or family violence leave even if an employee worked for half a da y). Make sick leave entitlement accumulate from the first day of employment , and family violence leave and bereavement leave entitlements available in full from the first day of employment, for eligible employees . Ensure employees do not need to have w orked for six months to have access to FBS leave, as these leave types are needs -based and when employees use them is typically outside of their control. • Adjus t the accumulation process for sick leave to align with the new minimum sick leave entitlement of 10 days per year. • Align the accumulation process for employees who become eligible after three months of employment with the process for employees who are eligible from their first day. Introduce a new criteria to determine whether an employee is eligible for FBAPS leave (based on whether they have agreed hours, are expected to be continuously employed, or the average hours they work per week ). Update the FBAPS leave eligibility criteria so it aligns with the change to make FBS leave available to eligible employees from day one. • Adjust the eligibility criteria and tests to remove complexity and provide clarity for employers and employees where there were gaps in the original proposal . • Remove proposed ability for employers to retest employees’ eligibility to receive their second and subsequent entitlements. Introduce a new prescriptive test to determine whether a day is an Otherwise Working Day for an employee. Provide employers with a prescriptive test to use to determine whether a day is an Otherwise Working D ay for an employee, so this is no longer based on employers’ judgement. • Specify how the prescriptive test should be applied in various circumstances, to ensure it is workable in practice and provides a definitive answer. • Clarify that the reference period for the prescriptive test should only be 13 weeks (rather than 4 and 13 weeks as originally proposed), to align with Cabinet’s decision about Short Run Average Weekly Earnings. Introduce a new payment method for FBAPS leave so it is paid at the greater of two calculations: Ordinary Leave Pay and Average Daily Pay. Provide a clear method for employers to use so employees are paid at least what they would have been paid had they worked on the day of FBAPS leave (the current payment method may result in some employees with variable hours or commission payments not receiving what they would have been paid if they had worked). • Adjust the payment method when it is based on average hours to provide some flexibility for employers, by allowing employers and employees to agree that FBAPS leave hours be based on average hours worked on all days of work over the previous 13 weeks (instead of on that specific calendar day). • Clarify which hours must be included as FBAPS leave hours when an employment agreement or roster is used to determine the hours of FBAPS leave taken , as this was not clear in the original proposal . Extend bereavement leave so employees are entitled to three days for a wider scope of family members, including stepfamily, family - by-marriage, aunts, uncles, nieces and nephews, and cultural family groups . Recognise that employees may have varied family arrangements or cultural practices, and could be equally bereaved by the loss of extended family and culturally recognised family members. • Clarify that the extension is to a ‘spouse or partner’s family members’ and not only ‘family by marriage’ , and limit scope of ‘spouse or partner’s family members’ the extension covers, to remove uncertainty for employers and employees . • Clarify ‘cultural family groups’ is limited to culturally recognised family members the employee has a relationship with that is similar to those listed in legislation, to remove uncertainty for employers and employees . • Specify that employees can use bereavement leave at any time and on non- consecutive days, to recognise that employees may need to use bereavement leave in different ways. Leave in restructuring situations – see Annex Four for further proposals Enable employees to choose whether to transfer their leave entitlements or have them paid out when a business is sold or transferred and they transfer their employment to the new employer . Align legislative requirements with common practice. Employers are currently required to pay out employees’ annual leave and alternative holidays when their employment ends (if they are not a specified category of employee with additional protections set out in the Employment Relations Act 2000), but in practice these leave entitlements are often transferred with t heir employment. N/A Parental leave – see Annex four for further proposals Remove the ‘parental leave override’ , which results in employees who take annual leave being paid less for annual leave they take in the 12 months following their return to work . Ensure employees who take parental leave are not paid less for annual leave they take in the 12 months following their return to work. • Also remove the override in relation to volunteers’ leave, which follows the same framework as parental leave. Other matters Update record -keeping requirements . Align record- keeping requirements with the other changes being made. • Refine list of record- keeping requirements to reflect final design details and ensure the requirements are clear. Require employers to provide employees with a pay statement in each pay period, and allow employees to request their pay statement be provided in a specific format. Increase transparency for employees regarding their pay and leave entitlements so they can better understand whether they have been calculated correctly. • Specify how pay statement requirements would be set out in legislation. • Clarify that pay statements must be provided in either a physical or digital format that an employee has access to without needing to raise a request, to provide more flexibility to employers . Consid er issues that cause non- compliance in the design of compliance and enforcement mechanisms . Support the implementation of the changes being made by ensuring they can be appropriately enforced. • Specify a criteria to determine which provisions in the new legislation will have penalties for failure to comply.
Announcement by the Minister for Building and Construction
Annual Performance Report 2019/20
Annual Performance Report 2020/21
Annual Performance Report 2021/22
Annual Performance Report 2022/23
Annual Report-back and Refresh of the Employment Strategy
Annual disability snapshot
Annual emissions for the manufacturing sector (2019 baseline)
Annual holiday entitlement : Also known as annual leave, this is an employee’s legal right to not less than four weeks of paid annual holidays each year after working for an employer for 12 months (Section s 15 to 20 of the Holidays Act 2003 (the Act )). Average daily pay ( ‘ADP’) : The daily average of an employee’s gross earnings over the past 52 weeks. This is worked out by adding up the employee’s gross earnings for the period, and dividing this by the number of whole or part days the employee either worked or was on paid leave or holidays for, during that period. An employer may use an employee’s ADP for the purposes of calculating payment for a public holiday, an alternative holiday, sick leave, or bereavement leave if it is not possible or practicable to determine releva nt daily pay or daily pay varies within the pay period when the leave falls (Sections 9A, 49, 50, 52, 53, 60 and 71 of the Act ). Average weekly earnings (‘AWE’) : AWE is one method for calculating annual holiday payment rates (the other being Ordinary Weekl y Pay). It is 1/52 of the employee’s gross earnings for the 12 months immediately before the end of the last pay period before the annual holiday (Sections 16, 21, 22, 24 and 71 of the Act ). BAPS leave : A collective term for Bereavement leave, Alternative holidays, Public holidays and Sick leave. ‘Casual’ employee : Employment legislation does not define what ‘casual’ employee means (it is set out in case law). It is generally taken to mean an employee who works only as and when required, can turn down work and has no expectation of ongoing employment (Section 28 of the Act ). Closedown period : Employers can have a customary closedown of all or part of their operations once a year and require employees to take annual holidays during the closedown, even if an employee has to take unpaid leave. Christmas is the most common time for a closedown, although it can occur at any time of year (Section s 29 to 35 of the Act ). Fixed -term agreement : Employment relationships with a set start and end day or event, along with a genuine reason based on reasonable grounds for such an arrangement. This arrangement , including the way in which the employment will end and the reasons for it ending that way, must be clearly specified in writing in the employment agreement (Section 28 of the Act ). Gross earnings (‘GE’) : For the purposes of calculating payments for holidays and leave, gross earnings means all payments that the employer is required to pay to the employee under the employee’s employment agreement for the period during which the earnings are being assessed (Sections 8, 9A, 10A, 14, 23, 25, 26, 28 and 34 of the Act ). Leave without pay : When an employer allows an employee time off work when they would otherwise be working, but does not pay them for this time (Section 16 of the Act ). Ordinary Weekly Pay (‘OWP’) : The amount an employee receives under their employment agreement for an ordinary working week, including regular allowances, regular productivity or incentive -based payments (including commission and bonu ses), the cash value of board or lodgings, and regular overtime. Intermittent or one -off payments as well as discretionary payments and employer contributions to superannuation schemes are not included in ordinary weekly pay (Sections 8, 10, 10A, 11, 21, 2 2, 24 and 71 of the Act ). Otherwise Working Day (‘OWD’) : An otherwise working day is a day that an employee would have worked, if it was not for them being sick, being on bereavement leave, being on annual holidays or it being a public holiday (Section s 12, 13, 43 and 68 of the Act ).
Annual holidays entitlement 2. Annual holidays entitlements should be calculated, taken, paid and held in weeks or portions of weeks. 3. Employees should become en titled to four weeks’ leave after 12 months continuous employ ment, but have the ability to take leave in advance on a pro -rata basis . 4. A clear process should be followed to determine how much of an employee’s leave entitlement should be used for a period of time away from work. Where an employee’s days and hours of w ork are set out in an employment agreement, shift roster or other document and these are an accurate reflection of the employee’s actual working pattern, these agreed days and hours should be used as t he basis for determining leave entitlements and deducti ons. 5. The ‘parental leave override’ in the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act 1987 should be removed , to address discrimination against parents who take time off to care for their young children. 6. The ability for employers to use pay -as-you-go (PAY G) for employees on fixed -term contracts of less than 12 months should be removed
Annual holidays entitlement 2. Annual holidays entitlements should be calculated, taken, paid and held in weeks or portions of weeks. 3. Employees should become en titled to four weeks’ leave after 12 months continuous employ ment, but have the ability to take leave in advance on a pro -rata basis . 4. A clear process should be followed to determine how much of an employee’s leave entitlement should be used for a period of time away from work. Where an employee’s days and hours of w ork are set out in an employment agreement, shift roster or other document and these are an accurate reflection of the employee’s actual working pattern, these agreed days and hours should be used as t he basis for determining leave entitlements and deducti ons. 5. The ‘parental leave override’ in the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act 1987 should be removed , to address discrimination against parents who take time off to care for their young children. 6. The ability for employers to use pay -as-you-go (PAY G) for employees on fixed -term contracts of less than 12 months should be removed 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
Annual holidays – determining entitlements and payments 4.2 59. There are a range of specific issues related to those sections of the Act that deal with the entitlements to, and payments for, annual holidays. A more detailed list of these issues is set out in Annex 2 but some of the more significant issues are outlined below. 4.2.1 Determining what a week is 60. Section 16 of the Act states that ‘ after the end of each completed 12 months of continuous employmen t, an employee is entitled to not less than 4 weeks’ paid annual holidays’ . A fundamental issue in terms of compliance with the Act is therefore determining what a week is in relation to an employee’s working arrangements. 61. This can be very simple for some but difficult for other forms of working arrangements as illustrated in the scenarios below .  Tina works 9.30 -4.30 from Monday to Friday. It is not difficult to determine a working week for Tina.  Simon works a regular four -day on/four -day off, 12 hour s hift pattern. This means
Annual implementation Report 2021
Annual implementation Report 2022
Annual implementation report 2021
Annual implementation report 2022
Annual implementation reports
Annual letter of expectations for 2024-2025
Annual reporting enables us to evaluate contract performance and remain informed about research progress. We also use data obtained via annual reporting for policy and strategy development, marketing and our corporate accountability documents.
Annual waste produced in New Zealand (2019 baseline)
Another example of adding value to some of our existing bioresources and biomass.
Another example showing that we need to add more new value to this resource.
Answer questions in a short survey (now closed)
Anti-dumping and countervailing duty refunds
Antony Royal Māori telecommunications and technology industry representative
Any achievements and specific accomplishments in their scientific work or in raising public awareness in science.
Any action taken as a result of a breach of any of the obligations set out in this policy will be conducted in good faith, a fair process will be followed, and the person involved will have a full opportunity to respond to the concerns or allegations and have access to appropriate support, advice or representation.
Any citizen of an APEC member economy is eligible to be nominated for the ASPIRE Prize. All 2023 nominees must be under the age of 40 as of 31 December 2023.
Any complaints or disputes concerning damage to other property can be referred in the first instance to the respective network operator.
Any external security consultant engaged by MBIE to gather information to support our regulatory compliance activities will be licensed under the Private Security Personnel and Private Investigators Act 2010 and required to comply with all relevant legislation and Codes of Conduct, and MBIE policies and procedures.
Any information redacted in this document is redacted in accordance with MBIE’s policy on Proactive Release and is labelled with the reason for redaction. This may include information th at would be redacted if this information was requested under Official Information Act 1982. Where this is the case, the reasons for withholding information are listed below. Where information has been withheld, no public interest has been identified that w ould outweigh the reasons for withholding it.
Any information redacted in this document is redacted in accordance with MBIE’s policy on Proactive Release and is labelled with the reason for redaction. This may include information that would be redacted if this information was requested under Official Information Act 1982. Where this is the case, the reasons for withholding information are listed below. Where information has been withheld, no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it.
Any information you provide through screen sharing is voluntary and you are not required by law to provide any information.
Any network infrastructure that is funded through the first phase of the Rural Broadband Initiative (RBI) must be open access, and provide for a range of services being provided from a range of retail providers.
Any organisation wanting to find out more about NZRIS can get in touch by emailing
Any person who believes that a child or young person has been, or is likely to be,
Any reforms will aim to promote the long-term interests of consumers by ensuring:
Any scheme with defined rules will have disputes, but we expect these to occur in only a small number of cases. The scheme will have an independent dispute resolution process.
Any such information gathering must be approved according to our internal authorisation process. That process, and any related activities, are required to be regularly reviewed to ensure compliance with the law, our internal policies, and our risk management requirements.
Anyone can apply for a board role, unless they:
Anyone can carry out business as a postal operator by collecting, carrying or delivering letters, provided they are registered as a postal operator with us.
Anyone who carries on business as a postal operator without being registered could be convicted and fined up to $10,000 and another $1,000 for every day that the offence continues.
Aotearoa / New Zealand Peace Foundation
Aotearoa New Zealand delivers exceptioanl visitor experiences
Aotearoa New Zealand embarks on ambitious new space research
Aotearoa New Zealand is joining forces with US space company Axiom to collaborate on ambitious new space research that could have far reaching benefits for humankind.
Aotearoa New Zealand will require new generation to meet future electricity demand, according to the latest Electricity Demand and Generation Scenarios (EDGS) report released by the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) today.
Aotearoa best practice dispute resolution framework (the Framework)
Appendix 1: Changes in Pilot Scope
Appendix A: References and additional resources
Appendix B: Detailed evaluation approach
Appendix C: Key events in the building consent system
Appendix Three: Proposed adjustments to the 2020 Cabinet decisions related to the provisions for providing, taking and
Appendix: useful links and information sources
Applicants are encouraged to apply international technical standards when developing the mitigation measures for the ODMP. Compliance with the following guidelines and standards will generally meet the requirements of regulation 13 and the Inter -Agency Spa ce Debris Coordination Committee ( IADC ) Space Debris Guidelines ; + NASA -STD-8719.14 – NASA Technical Standard + ISO 24113 - Space Debris Mitigation Standards (and any other space debris -related ISO standards ), are available through Standards New Zealand + Space Debris Mitigation Guidelines o f the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (UNCOPUOS) + JMR -003D – JAXA Space Debris Mitigation Standards + ESSB -HB-U-002 – ESA Space Debris Mitigation Compliance Verification Guidelines .
Applicants are expected to be familiar with the Trusted Research Guidance for Institutions and Researchers and (for universities) the Universities New Zealand Trusted Research - Protective Security Requirements (TR-PSR) guidance. If there are any questions arising from this, consult your Research Office.
Applicants are required to provide prescribed information on the capability and intended end-use of the payload. If insufficient information is provided, MBIE engages with applicants to request additional information, to ensure the nature of the payload and its planned activities are understood. All payload permit applications are assessed by technical experts.
Applicants can apply for 1 or more events. The minimum amount of funding available for each event is $5,000 and the total funding for additional event promotion costs across all approved events for that RTO/Council, is a maximum of $237,500 per round.
Applicants can apply for up to 50% of their existing promotional budget to undertake additional promotion of an event, with some flexibility for financially constrained RTOs/councils
Applicants must co-fund at least 50% of each e-bike charging station
Application and assessment information
Application and assessment process
Application for High-Altitude Licence APP002 [DOCX 313KB]
Application for Payload Permit APP001
Application for payload permit APP001
Application form for gas distributors seeking gas operator status
Application form for gas distributors seeking gas operator status.
Applications are open now for funding from the following science and innovation funds and grants.
Applications close on 3 November 2024.
Applications for Round 2 will be open from 3 April 2025 to 16 April 2025.
Applications for support through the programme closed on 18 June 2020.
Applications for the 2025 New Zealand Space Scholarship close on 3 November 2024.
Applications for the Tourism Data Partnership Fund will open on
Applications must be a collaborative effort led by a Regional Tourism Organisation (RTO).
Applications now open for Tourism Infrastructure Fund
Applications open on 25 February 2025 and will close at 11:59pm on 11 March 2025.
Applications open on Friday 16 August 2024 and close on Friday 18 October 2024.
Applications should be focused on:
Applications that make use of satellite signals and data
Applications will be assessed using the following criteria:
Applications will be considered by an independent panel with expertise in tourism promotion.
Applicaton form to apply for funding from the Regional Events Promotion Fund round 2.
Applied Geophysics (ESCI305)
Apply by 5pm, 30 June 2025
Apply for a permit to send a payload into space.
Applying to be a postal operator
Appointment and reappointment
Appointment of steering group members and chair
Appropriate training is completed by all employees providing children's services, both before they start the role and during their tenure.
Approval for signature of the Horizon Europe Association Agreement between the European Union and New Zealand [PDF 1.1MB]
Approve d rafting of legislation 6. Note the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety has submitted a legislative programme bid for amendments to the Holidays Act with a Category 5 status (instructions to be provided to Parliamentary Counsel Office in 2020)
Approved codes of practice
Approves minor changes to the policy and associated procedures
Approves new and major amendments to this policy
Approves new and major amendments to this policy and associated procedures
Arbitration / Adjudication
Are you interested in exploring Horizon Europe funding opportunities?
Are you wondering how to build visibility and profile for your team amongst European and International collaborators?
Area Three: Amendments to other legislation (Full details in Appendix Four) I am proposing a consequential amendment to the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act 1987 (PLEPA) that disconnects parental leave payment calculations from the Holidays Act . I am also proposing to adjust the policy regarding the treatment of leave entitlements in r estructuring situations to provide flexibility and support common practice. 1 A consequential amendment to the parental leave payment methodology in the PLEPA : this is required because the PLEPA relies on the existing Holidays Act definition of “ordinary weekly pay” (OWP) to calculate parental leave payments. Cabinet agreed that OWP be replaced. I propose a standalone formula in the PLEPA which is more aligned with the methodology Inland Rev enue (IR) currently uses for the calculated income estimate of OWP . 6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:12:15 I N C O N F I D E N C E
Area Two : Paying and accumulating other leave types (family violence , bereavement and sick leave and alternative and public h olidays ) (Full details in Appendix Three) The proposals focus on reducing the complexity of the payment methodologies by removing the requirement to make two calculations and avoiding the overinflation of payments that they could have caused in some situations. They also update the profile for accumulating sick leave from the first day of employment. 1 Simplifying the payment methodologies so that only one calculation is required : This proposal will replace the 2020 decision to introduc e a requirement to make two calculations and pay the greater of them. The proposed calculation will achieve the intended objective of removing the ne ed for employers to apply judgment and will reduce the complexity of the methodology. It should avoid the overinflati on of payments the current proposal may lead to and provide overall payment outcomes that can be considered a fair reflection of what an employee would have earned on a day had they been at work. 2 A longer and simpler t imeframe for accumulation of sick leav e: In 2020 Cabinet agreed that eligible employees’ annual entitlement to five days sick leave should begin accumulating from the first day of employment with full entitlement reached after four months ( one day each month) . Sick lea ve entitlement has since increased to 10 days per year . I propose an accumulation profile over six months with fewer accumulation points .
Areas for work health and safety reform: approval to consult
Argo Navis Limited (Argo Navis) was a New Zealand aerospace company, specialising in the development of innovative rocket propulsion systems for the space industry.
Around $30 million of co-funding from local stakeholders was contributed towards construction of the Great Rides.
Around 60% of temporary work migrants from the Pacific came to New Zealand under the Recognised Seasonal Employer Scheme.
Around half of these workers found employment in the Auckland region, followed by 16% in Canterbury.
Around half the advisers perceived the website experience positively. They called for enhanced ease of website navigation including a better search engine, and more detailed information.
Around one-fifth of Pacific residence approvals were through the
Around three-quarters of advisers had used Immigration Online (on behalf of), with use significantly higher among onshore advisers. There was little dissatisfaction with this channel. Off-shore advisers said they were more likely to use it if technology problems were resolved, as the benefits were a reduced need to use Visa Application Centres (VACs) and the ability to lodge applications at any time.
Arrangement on scientific and technological cooperation between New Zealand and the Republic of Korea [PDF 53KB]
Arrangement relating to research, science and innovation cooperation between the government of New Zealand and the government of Great Britain and Northern Ireland [PDF 124KB]
Arrangement relating to science, technology and innovation cooperation between New Zealand and Singapore [PDF 87KB]
Arranging for IT, furniture, access, and other equipment to be provided to enable safe and secure remote working where necessary.
Artificial Intelligence (AI)
As Easter approaches, the Labour Inspectorate is reminding employers and employees to understand their rights and obligations concerning Easter trading laws.
As NZRIS matures, it is expected to contain 2 main types of data: data about funding and other resources that enable research to happen; and data about the research activity itself. Data about funding and other resources will generally include the name of the research fund or other resource, its purpose, how it is being distributed, and who it is distributed to. Data about research activity will generally include the name of the project and outputs. Both types of data will include the names of organisations and individuals involved in the research.
As New Zealand looks to move beyond the economic and social impacts of COVID-19, there are important lessons to be learned from the way in which we were able to support one another through an unprecedented series of challenges.
As Yvonne, said, nothing is impossible it just depends on how you are looking at it. This was a life changing experience for me and I would do it again in a heartbeat.
As a licenced space participant you must take, and continue to take, all reasonable steps to manage risks to public safety1. In determining what is reasonable, the applicant will first need to consider what is possible. Applicants are expected to identify the risks that the operation will (or could) expose the public to, and to find out what control measures are available to eliminate or minimise those risks to public safety. Applicants will then need to determine what is reasonable to do in their circumstances. Applicants must provide the highest level of protection to the public that they reasonably can. Generally, applicants may consider cost as a reason not to implement an effective safety control where that cost is grossly disproportionate to the public safety risk, but only after fully assessing the options that are reasonably available to eliminate or minimise the harm that could occur should that risk be realised Applicants may be asked to demonstrate why identified controls that are not implemented, are not reasonable in their circumstances. There should be appropriate evidence to justify decisions. The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) expects that to ensure public safety as a responsible space participant applicants will: ȓ engage and consult with workers, stakeholders and ȓ the safety equipment, standards and controls that others impacted by their operations; are selected will be fit for purpose and the most suitable for the operations; ȓ identify and understand the hazards and public safety risks that the operations will or could expose others to; ȓ verify that controls are functioning as intended, and where issues arise that these will be dealt with and ȓ identify and develop the people, systems and the controls continuously improved; standards that will be needed given the scope and complexity of the operations to ensure public safety; ȓ take opportunities to make safety improvements where they are identified, unless it is not reasonable to do so; ȓ put in place clear rules, procedures and standards that are expected to be followed by the people ȓ have suitable plans in place to cope with an unforeseen involved with the operations; emergency, and that these will continue to be tested. What is a Safety Case? A safety case is a written document that describes through a compelling argument the applicant’s commitment to, and plan for, an operation that ensures the safety of the public. The safety case must be supported by a body of evidence. It is important to understand how the safety case will work in the context of your operations, to benefit public safety. The safety case will be a high level document signed off by the applicant’s governing Board and Executive leadership team. It will: ȓ integrate with the operations management systems ȓ provide assurance that the systems and controls in and support the applicant to manage the risks to place will manage, and continue to manage, these risks; public safety; ȓ demonstrate how the applicant will gain assurance ȓ provide assurance that the applicant understands that the controls are being implemented and that what risks have been created, or could be created; they are effective. As a minimum applicants will need to ensure that the safety case addresses the requirements of the Outer Space and High-altitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulations 2017 (‘the regulations’). 1 Outer Space and High-altitude Activities Act 2017 sections 9(1)(b), 25(1)(b), 40(1)(b) & 47(1)(a)(ii) 2
As a member of the ILO, New Zealand is required to report annually on the position of its law and practice in relation to unratified instruments including conventions and recommendations. The set of instruments for each General Survey are focused on a particular subject matter.
As a result, members of the New Zealand interpreter workforce will need to be credentialed or Working Towards NAATI (WTN) as meeting the appropriate NAATI standards, if they wish to continue providing interpreting services to New Zealand public sector agencies from 1 July 2024.
As a result, minor changes were made to the national interest risk review process in light of the values and objectives from the Policy and feedback from the Space Policy Review consultation, as well as specific feedback from agencies and within MBIE regarding the process,
As a series of Zipped CSV files
As a society we want our bioeonomy to deliver on these objectives in order to maintain and grow this incredible employment that it creates for us, and we want to ensure a stable domestic supply of food, fibre, and wood. We want to grow export revenues and maintain or grow our contribution to GDP, while at the same time the bioeconomy is going to face higher wages, higher labour, we want to be richer country, we want to pay people more. We are going to have more rules and high compliance costs, that is just a fact of life. We are going to have higher energy costs and there is going to be less land and less useable water space. At the same time to achieve our national and global targets we must emit less carbon dioxide, create less methane, create less nitrous oxide, and send less waste to landfills. This is the problem we are trying to solve, we are trying to find products, platforms within the bioeconomy that can help us get to this.
As a state servant you are also expected to read, understand and adhere to:
As above, Cabinet decisions are expected on proposals on proposed legislation to address modern slavery and worker exploitation in operations and supply chains. Legislation is intended to be introduced in 2023.
As above, in May 2022 OT and MoJ met with the Chief Justice of Kiribati to discuss how to work collaboratively with the judiciary to implement child safeguarding measures in the adoption process, to prevent child trafficking and exploitation. OT has been working closely with the Pacific Justice Sector Programme, and Tonga specifically, to identify models of practice within the Pacific judiciary which prevent trafficked children being trafficked and exploited.
As above, public consultation on proposed legislation to address modern slavery and worker exploitation in operations and supply chains undertaken from 8 April to 7 June 2022. A submissions report was published on the MBIE website in September.
As above, the Education and Workforce Committee will report on the Worker Protection (Migrant and Other Employee) Bill. It is expected that the Bill will be passed by Parliament in Quarter 3 2023.
As agreed with you, w e’ve continued discussions with
As an employee you have the right to:
As an example, this is a page out of the seafood sector where we look at the number of registered fishing boats so that has surged and then it has been declining, so we see that there is an increasing productivity in average tonnes landed per vessel.
As humans, we bring our own subconscious biases into all decision we make. Through automation we can limit and reduce the impact of these biases and provide more consistent decisions and responses. For example, algorithms that assist with recruitment, finance and procurement allocation.
As of April 2024, Dr Longdell reports that the photon pair sources have been completed. They were built at the DLR in Berlin and are now working in the Otago lab. The focus has now switched to the quantum memories.
As part of Electrify NZ, the Government has committed to delivering a regulatory regime for offshore renewable energy, to enable investment and deliver clean energy at scale.
As part of our commitment to providing the best possible service to our customers, we record all inbound and outbound communication with the MBIE Customer Service Centre i.e., telephone calls and email queries. This helps us to identify ways that we can provide you with a better service.
As part of our commitment to providing the best possible service to our customers, we record all inbound and outbound communication with the MBIE Customer Service Centre i.e., telephone calls and email queries. This helps us to identify ways that we can provide you with a better service. For more information, read our Privacy statement:
As part of our commitment to the charter, we are implementing an MBIE Algorithm Use Policy. The purpose of this policy is to enable accountability for decisions at MBIE, increase transparency about our algorithm use, and strengthen support systems for our staff working with algorithms.
As part of our ongoing commitment to supporting tourism research, this section provides the tourism forecasts microdata.
As part of our work managing radio spectrum, MBIE has laid the groundwork preparing for 5G through industry workshops and has run a public consultation process to discuss 5G spectrum bands and their future allocation. MBIE is also working with interested parties on technical and regulatory issues relating to 5G.
As part of the Language Assistance Services Programme a new standards and certification framework for language practitioners working across the public sector, the NAATI framework, will come into effect from 2024.
As part of the Language Assistance Services Programme, a new standards and accreditation framework for interpreters working across the public sector, the NAATI framework, came into effect from 1 July 2024.
As part of the Review, we also commissioned wide-ranging research on the nature of temporary migrant worker exploitation, and the gaps and opportunities to address this. This research was conducted through a third party, to provide an independent and confidential space to hear the experiences of migrant and international student groups, and to hear from unions and businesses.
As part of the global effort to combat climate change, New Zealand is participating in the MethaneSAT space mission.
As part of the new fibre regime, regulations are now in place which require Chorus to provide specified anchor broadband and voice services and a direct fibre access service (DFAS) on the terms and the maximum prices set in the regulations. The regulations come into effect on 1 January 2022.
As part of the recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic, Tourism New Zealand continues to encourage domestic travel. Recently they launched new domestic winter activity showcasing a range of Aotearoa winter experiences. Despite borders opening for overseas travel, new research shows that around two thirds of New Zealanders intend to take a domestic holiday in the next 12 months. The research also shows that winter is our second favourite season for holidaying.
As part of the tender process, suppliers have been evaluated based on factors including their experience and ability to provide a high volume of language interpreting services.
As part of the use of our statutory powers and to gather and preserve information and evidence, we may:
As part of their Consumers Price Index (CPI) calculations, Statistics New Zealand surveys a selection of service stations in 12 regions of New Zealand, as well as collecting information about discounting from the major fuel retailers, to produce quarterly average prices.
As part of their internships, students are partnered with NASA scientists, who serve as the students' mentors. Students complete designated projects outlined by their mentors, gaining educational experience in their fields of study while also contributing to NASA missions and science.
As part of this commitment we are releasing, on a quarterly basis, a summary of all payloads approved for launch by the Minister for Space.
As the building regulator, we monitor current and emerging trends in the building sector, including the lessons to be learnt following the Canterbury earthquakes.
As the government agency responsible for telecommunications policy, we have a focus on developing efficient, reliable and responsive infrastructure, productive and competitive businesses, and a world-class business environment.
As the national mail carrier, New Zealand Post must meet certain minimum obligations relating to the sale and delivery of postal products. These obligations are set out in an agreement between New Zealand Post and the government in the Deed.
As well as being able to opt back into unjustified dismissal coverage, employers and employees can continue to negotiate their own employment dispute resolution processes into their employment agreement.
As well as climate change, global megatrends like ageing populations and technology change will result in major changes to the structure of the economy. New Zealand needs to better understand, and prepare for, these and other structural changes.
As well as offering world-class visitor experiences that showcase some of the best landscapes and scenery that New Zealand has to offer, the trails create ongoing job opportunities and economic, recreational and health benefits for New Zealanders.
As well as offering world-class visitor experiences that showcase some of the best landscapes and scenery that New Zealand-Aotearoa has to offer, the trails create ongoing job opportunities and economic, recreational and health benefits for New Zealanders.
As well as the centre's host Massey University, research partners are:
As you can see at the top of the slides, we've got various phases through the life of this complex with the design phase, procurement, construction, the usage phase, and then end of life phase. When we are going through all that, then things might be building up over time, as each business case is presented then they may be thinking that will be really useful to have inside the digital twin.
Ashburton District Council
Asia region funds passport
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) is a regional economic forum established in 1989.
Aside from financial support, can you think of any other support that would help workers return to work?
Asking for an interpreter when calling government services
Assess number of roles requested(WA3.15(l)) [PDF 59KB]
Assessing competition impacts
Assessing the proposed regulatory changes
Assessing, approving, or declining flexible working arrangement proposals in line with the accompanying procedures, guidelines, and this policy.
Assessment of application to add security officers to Schedule 1A of the Employment Relations Act 2000 [PDF 694KB]
Assessment of the New Zealand Ecosystem
Assessment panel pick the New Zealand candidate
Assists business groups with any breach management/mitigation activities as required
Associate Deputy Secretary Immigration. Supports the Deputy Secretary Immigration to lead Immigration New Zealand into the future. They manage key strategic partnerships related to the global immigration system, our authorising environment and our commitments under te Tiriti o Waitangi.
Associate Minister for Energy
Associate Minister for Regional Development
Associate Minister for Social Development and Employment
Associate Minister of Housing
Associate Minister of Immigration
Associate Professor at Otago University Jevon Longdell is leading this project from the New Zealand side, and says it is these qubits that his team is working to harness and store.
Association of Salaried Medical Specialists
Assurance Risk and Accountability Committee (ARA)
Assurance over climate-related disclosures: occupational regulation and expanding the scope of assurance
Astrobiology and biology (including human performance in extreme environments)
Astrophysics, space sciences, and exploration
At 152,432, the number of temporary workers present in New Zealand on 30 June 2017 was 16% higher than the year before. This growth was driven by:
At a high level, the Review will include:
At a minimum, an annual Flexible Working at MBIE pulse check will be implemented to measure the status of the flexible working culture across MBIE, including the application of informal and ad hoc arrangements.
At any time, you may choose to end the screen share session if you wish.
At least 240 manned points of presence where customers:
At least 880 points of presence, comprised of physical outlets and self-service kiosks.
At the New Zealand Space Agency we want all New Zealanders to take advantage of the infinite possibilities the global space economy has to offer.
At the bottom of the arrow are 2 further arrow scales that span the length of the arrow, they show:
At times people employed by us may engage in forums on LinkedIn and other online channels. Any opinions or views expressed on these forums belong to the individual staff member. Our staff acting in an official capacity will identify themselves along with their position within the organisation, and state that they are representing the Ministry.
Atmospheric science programme
Atmospheric science programme questions
Attach your submission as a Microsoft Word or PDF file and email to:
Attracting international screen productions to New Zealand produces a range of direct and indirect economic benefits. These include on-the-ground production expenditure and spill-over benefits to other areas of economic activity.
Auckland Uniservices Limited
Auckland University of Technology
Australia is a close SI&T partner, and currently our most frequent collaborator in terms of co-publications between our researchers. This relationship is supported by an overarching SI&T Cooperation agreement and a work programme of collaborative activities. Current bilateral programmes are focused on cyber security and space technologies.
Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS).
Australian New Zealand Scientific Research Classifications
Australian Research Council (ARC)
Authorised by: Katherine MacNeill Manager, International Strategy Labour, Science and Enterprise 14 August 2017 2
Authorised for lodgement Hon Iain Lees -Galloway Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety
Authors must publish their outputs in a way that allows them to retain sufficient rights to comply with the policy, either by retaining copyright over their published works (as opposed to transferring copyright to the publisher), or by publishing their work in a journal that permits them to deposit their manuscript in an Open Access repository.
Avalon Kent (July to December 2018)
Average D aily Pay (‘ADP’): The daily average of an employee’s gross earnings over the previous 52 weeks. This is worked out by adding up the employee’s gross earnings for the period, and dividing this by the number of whole or part days the employee either worked , or was on paid leave or holidays for, during that period. An employer may use an employee’s ADP for the purposes of calculating payment for a public holiday, an alterna tive holiday, sick leave, family violence or bereavement leave if it is not possib le or practicable to determine Relevant Daily Pay or daily pay varies within the pay period when the leave falls (Sections 9A, 49, 50, 52, 53, 60 and 71 of the Act ).
Average Motor Vehicle levy
Average weekly earnings (‘AWE’): AWE is one method for calculating annual holiday payment rates (the other being Ordinary Weekly Pay). It is 1/52 of the employee’s gross earnings for the 12 months immediately before the end of the last pay period before the annua l holiday (Sections 16, 21, 22, 24 and 71 of the Act ).
Awarded to Robin McNeill MNZM
BAPS leave (bereavement leave, alternative holidays, public 4.3 holidays and sick leave) – determining entitlements and payments 74. There are also a range of specific issues related to those sections of the Holidays Act that deal with the entitlement to, and payments for, BAPS leave. A full list of these issues is set out in Annex 2 but some of the more significant issues are outlined below. 4.3.1 Determining an ‘otherwise working day’ 75. The concept of an ‘otherwise working day’ (OWD) is a fundamental test for all leave (an employee can only take leave on a day that they would have otherwise been working), but it is particularly relevant for determining an employee’s entitlement to BAPS leave. 76. Section 12(3) provides a list of factors that ca n be taken into account by the employer and employee when they agree on whether a day is an OWD. The factors to be considered are not ranked and taking these into account is, by definition, a subjective and hypothetical decision requiring communication and agreement between the
BE READY PLUS: pandemic preparedness
BNPL lenders will be required to provide information to borrowers who miss payments about financial mentoring services.
BNPL lenders will have to disclose key information about credit contracts and any variations.
BNPL lenders will need to be part of an external dispute resolution scheme and provide details of the scheme if borrowers make a complaint or hardship application. Consumers will be able to receive compensation and statutory damages from lenders who breach relevant CCCFA rules.
BNPL loans will be exempt from the requirement to carry out affordability assessments if they comply with a range of credit reporting and other requirements intended to reduce the risk of consumers getting into problem debt.
BNPL providers were not automatically required to comply with the rules under the Credit Contracts and Consumer Finance Act (CCCFA). This is because they do not charge interest, credit fees or take a security interest over goods. BNPL products are subject to the Fair Trading Act 1986, and some BNPL lenders offer other products which are CCCFA regulated, such as credit cards.
BRIEFING Holidays Act Review: background, progress and next steps Date: 21 December 2023 Priority: Medium Security classification: In Confidence Tracking number: 2324- 0982 Purpose To provide you with background to the Holidays Act 2003 , the work underway to improve the legislation and the basis for a discussion on how to proceed with that work. Executive s ummary The Holidays Act 2003 (the Act) is a core part of the employment relations and standards regulatory system. It sets out minimum leave entitlements and payments that employers are obliged to provide to their employees. The Act is difficult for employers and payroll providers to apply in practice. This, combined with poor payroll and business system practices, have contributed to systemic compliance issues with the Act that have been well known since 2012. Large- scale remediation payments, running into billions of dollars, have been made across both the public and private sectors. The Act was designed to accommodate diverse working and pay arrangements through flexible regulatory design, enabling employers to adopt a range of approaches to meeting their obligations. In practice however, this flexibilit y means that employers lack certainty about how to correctly calculate leave entitlements and pay. Employers must often apply their best judgment or reach agreement with employees based on the specific facts of the situation each time leave is taken, espec ially in situations where working arrangements and pay structures are not the same every week. The Act’s predominantly principles -based approach contrasts with a rules -based approach that would provide precise calculations and formulas , definite answers about leave entitlements and pay and be easier to implement in digital payroll systems. In March 2020, Cabinet endorsed in full the 22 recommendations for improvements to the Act made by a tripartite Holidays Act Taskforce. The recommendations retain the underlying framework of the Act (which provides entitlement after specified periods of employment to weeks of annual leave and days of other types of leave) and include: i. p rescriptive meth odologies, calculations and definitions ii. i mproved access to some leave entitlements iii. some increases to minimum leave payments iv. i mproved transparency and clarity around some processes . MBIE has completed a detailed policy design process with a stakeholder working group to design the technical details required to implement the recommendations in legislation. The previous Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety agreed to a number of adjustments to address areas where the working group identified ambiguities, gaps and opportunities for simplification. The Parliamentary Counsel Office (PCO) bega n drafting a Bill to implement the recommendations , but drafting work has been on hold since June 2023 to allow PCO to focus on Bills that were progressi ng pr ior to the 2023 General Election.
Bachelor of Advanced Science (Hons)
Bachelor of Applied Science (Biodiversity Management)
Bachelor of Applied Technology (Electrotechnology) Level 7
Bachelor of Applied Technology: Electrotechnology
Bachelor of Arts Mathematics
Bachelor of Arts Statistics
Bachelor of Computing Systems
Bachelor of Engineering Technology
Bachelor of Engineering Technology (Electrical) Level 7
Bachelor of Engineering with Honours
Bachelor of Engineering with Honours Mechatronics
Bachelor of Engineering with Honours in:
Bachelor of Engineering with Honours/Master of Engineering in:
Bachelor of Engineering with Honours/Masters of Engineering in:
Bachelor of Health Science
Bachelor of Information Sciences
Bachelor of Information Sciences Computer Science
Bachelor of Information Sciences Data Science
Bachelor of Science (BSc)
Bachelor of Science Mathematics
Bachelor of Science Statistics
Bachelor of Science in Astronomy, Astrophysics
Bachelor of Science in Software Engineering
Bachelor of Science or Engineering
Bachelor of Science/Bachelor of Applied Science/Bachelor of Data Science/Master of Science/Master of Data Science (names may vary) specialising/majoring in (many variations also exist):
Background and revisions to the IVS
Background information and associated documents related to workplace relations in the screen industry.
Background on mail in New Zealand
Background to the Act's development
Background to the RSE Review
Background to the consultation
Backing emerging technologies
Backpacker Youth Adventure Tourism Association
Bali Process Disruption of People Smuggling and Trafficking Working Group compendium of successful operations published
Bali Process Disruption of People Smuggling and Trafficking initiatives, including simulation based exercise and Joint Period of Action, on hold pending COVID-19 restrictions.
Bank account documentation from your bank such as a pre-coded deposit slip, bank letter or statement. The bank logo, account name and number must be clear
Baringa EV international case studies report
Baringa is an international consultancy with expertise in the energy sector, network regulation, and policy measures in place to support transport and low emissions transition objectives. The report presents international case studies describing how the United Kingdom and Australia are managing the transition towards EVs and supporting public EV charging infrastructure, with a focus on regulatory policy solutions. The report was commissioned to generate ideas and options that could be considered in New Zealand based on best practice and lessons learned from overseas jurisdictions.
Barriers, enablers and approaches for a more circular economy
Basic application details required for all types of licences and permits If a natural person, then: • Name • Address • Contact details • Current nationality
Bay of Islands, Northland Photo: Alistair Guthrie
Bay of Plenty Regional Workforce Plan
Be a New Zealand citizen (NASA requirement).
Be able to obtain appropriate insurance cover for travel and stay in the United States.
Be accessible to prospective workers and employers
Be available to participate in person from June to August 2025 (dates subject to change).
Be eligible for a J1 visa to the United States and have read and understood the J1 visa terms and conditions.
Be fluent in English to actively participate in discussions
Be part of small group informal sessions with their pre-selected speaker(s)
Be proficient in written and spoken English (NASA requirement).
Be transparent and consistent
Be willing to undergo any required health and security checks for travel to the US and entry into US federal facilities.
Because of this, all shop employees can refuse to work on Easter Sunday without any repercussions for their employment relationship.
Becoming a translator or interpreter for government agencies
Becoming one of the most aspirational travel destinations and transitioning to a regenerative model requires fundamental change to the foundations of our tourism system.
Becoming party to it would send a clear message of the importance New Zealand places on tackling forced labour and other forms of modern slavery.
Bed and Breakfast Association
Before applying for a board role check that you:
Before his current role, Paul was Deputy Secretary for our Labour, Science and Enterprise group, and as Deputy Director General at the Ministry for Primary Industries, responsible for Policy and Deputy Director General Strategy and Performance.
Before joining MBIE, Richard spent 8 years at BNZ in a variety of roles and was a member of the Executive team. He has held senior HR roles at ASB, Fonterra and had over 8 years with Air New Zealand in a number of operations roles including Manager NZ Airports.
Before making an OIA request, check out our other sources of information as you may find the information you need is already publicly available:
Before the end of your term, you should let the board Chair and the Board Appointments and Governance team know if you are open to being reappointed for another term.
Before the expiry date of their credential, practitioners are required to apply for recertification and provide evidence of continuing work practice and professional development to maintain the certification for a further 3 years.
Before to the introduction of the Auckland regional fuel tax on 1 July 2018, our method for monitoring weekly fuel prices and importer margins assumed that retail prices were the same across the country.
Before you apply to the Tourism Data Partnership Fund, read this website material to make sure your organisation and project meet the eligibility criteria.
Before you make a request
Being a good steward of our regulatory systems is a priority for MBIE. As regulatory stewardship is central to our organisational strategy
Below are the full dashboards as downloadable PDFs.
Below are the open and scheduled science and innovation funding and investment opportunities.
Below is a summary of the consultation feedback.
Benefits Review Committee
Benefits from international productions
Bereavement leave will be expanded so that employees can access 3 days of leave for more types of family members.
Berl: Business and Economic Research Limited
Besides complying with the Regulations, applicants may need to comply with other relevant requirements. For reference, resources about other potentially relevant requirements include:
Bespoke modern slavery capacity building with Pacific partners currently on hold due to closed borders.
Best practice guidance on dispute resolution
Better Protection for Contract Workers
Better Work Action Plan for tourism launched
Better for Business is a cross-agency programme developed to champion New Zealand businesses. We do this by identifying and developing easier and smarter ways for business and government to interact.
Better protections for vulnerable contractors
Between 2010 and 2015 New Zealand's consumer laws were comprehensively reviewed.
Between 2015 and 2018 the Labour Inspectorate delivered a pr ogramme of work focussed on remediation of historical underpayments, industry engagement and better provision of information and education.
Beyond the top 3 products there is a wide range of smaller or emerging marine bioactives. Krill oil we are now producing our own here and shark liver oil are now being produced in New Zealand, Abalone, Oyster, Sea Cucumber and Chitosan.
Bilateral and technology safeguards agreements
Bill makes to the minimum requirements and those employers will not incur additional costs related to them (for example many employers already provide sick leave from day one and do not apply the parental leave annual leave payment override) .
Bioeconomy Opportunities Research Executive Summary [PDF 936KB]
Biofuels and the sustainable biofuel obligation
Biographies for the Science System Advisory Group members.
Biological Weapons Convention
Biological weapon prohibition
Biomedical Science and Medical Laboratory Science
Blumhardt, H. (2023). Victoria University of Wellington.
Board appointment complaints policy
Board of Airline Representatives
Board's purpose and criteria
Bobbi Brown, GM Tourism & Events, Great South
Boosting rural connectivity and economic growth
Borrowers facing unforeseen hardship can apply to the lender to have their repayment contract varied.
Borrowers will be protected from unreasonable default fees.
Both Invest NZ and NZTE will be performance based and have a culture underpinned by clear economic incentives, with a laser focus on commercial outcomes. The agencies will also have clearly defined roles that allow them to function as easy conduits for inward investment and outward growth.
Both MBIE and territorial authorities have roles and responsibilities under the National Civil Defence Emergency Management (CDEM) Plan Order 2015 and the Building Act 2004. MBIE is one of several agencies with legal obligations, roles, and responsibilities for building management in emergencies. MBIE works with other agencies to plan for and provide co-ordinated, integrated and effective responses to emergencies. Territorial authorities must develop and maintain arrangements to ensure they are ready to respond to an emergency and lead recovery work.
Both NASA and ESA provide guidance on suggested OD MP format which includes all the relevant sections. Applicants are requested to provide an ODMP using the latest DRAMA or DAS software to show compliance with regul ation 13 . If DAS or DRAMA return a non -compliant result, we may require the applicant undertake a high -fidelity assessment and provide this to MBIE.
Both of these classifications follow a hierarchical structure.
Bragato Research Institute
Breaches of the Code may, following investigation, result in disciplinary action, up to and including a first formal warning; a final warning or dismissal either with or without notice.
Brendan Gould, Forest Owners Association
Briefing Approach to the Research & Development Tax Incentive Bill [PDF 72KB]
Briefing R&D Tax Incentive Summary of Submissions [PDF 1.5MB]
Briefing R&D Tax Incentive: Extensions to Growth Grant contracts [PDF 74KB]
Briefing for the Incoming Minister COVID-19 Response: Managed Isolation and Quarantine (MIQ) [PDF 2.5MB]
Briefing for the Incoming Minister for Economic Development [PDF 2.6MB]
Briefing for the Incoming Minister for the Digital Economy and Communications [PDF 2.1MB]
Briefing for the Incoming Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs [PDF 1.8MB]
Briefing for the Incoming Minister of Immigration [PDF 1.4MB]
Briefing for the incoming Minister Responsible for the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment [PDF 1.9MB]
Briefing for the incoming Minister Responsible for the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment [PDF 2.3MB]
Briefing for the incoming Minister for ACC [PDF 3.1MB]
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Auckland [PDF 723KB]
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Building and Construction [PDF 5.7MB]
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Commerce and Consumer Affairs [PDF 762KB]
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Economic Development [PDF 1MB]
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Economic Development [PDF 781KB]
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Economic Growth [PDF 603KB]
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Energy [PDF 2.1MB]
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Energy [PDF 742KB]
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Media and Communications [PDF 1.1MB]
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Regional Development [PDF 7.8MB]
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Regional Economic Development [PDF 667KB]
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Resources [PDF 1.9MB]
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Science, Innovation and Technology [PDF 3.2MB]
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Small Business and Manufacturing [PDF 627KB]
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Small Business and Manufacturing [PDF 748KB]
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Social Development and Employment [PDF 729KB]
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Space [PDF 2.5MB]
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Tourism and Hospitality [PDF 1.9MB]
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Tourism and Hospitality [PDF 494KB]
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Trade and Investment [PDF 518KB]
Briefing for the incoming Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety [PDF 3.8MB]
Briefing for the incoming Minister for the Public Service: Government Property Group [PDF 423KB]
Briefing for the incoming Minister for the South Island [PDF 561KB]
Briefing for the incoming Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs [PDF 4.1MB]
Briefing for the incoming Minister of Employment [PDF 1.9MB]
Briefing for the incoming Minister of Immigration - June 2022, updated October 2022 [PDF 1.5MB]
Briefing for the incoming Minister of Immigration [PDF 3.2MB]
Briefing for the incoming Minister of Science, Innovation and Technology [PDF 4.1MB]
Briefing for the incoming minister - Accident compensation portfolio - 20 December 2016 [PDF 840KB]
Briefing to the incoming Minister for Media and Communications [PDF 3MB]
Briefing: Draft Employment Relations Amendment Bill: Approval for Introduction
Briefing: Implementing the recommendations of the Murdoch Report [PDF 915KB]
Briefing: Proposed Changes to Employment Legislation
Briefing: Research & Development Tax Incentive - Early implementation review [PDF 365KB]
Briefing: Temporary migrant worker exploitation review - Business models and practices [PDF 2.9MB]
Briefing: Temporary migrant worker exploitation review - Improving the pathway for reporting and referring [PDF 3.6MB]
Briefing: Temporary migrant worker exploitation review - Overview [PDF 5.7MB]
Briefing: Temporary migrant worker exploitation review - Penalising and deterring employer non-compliance [PDF 7MB]
Briefings to Incoming Ministers
Briefings: Advice on providing greater certainty for contracting parties [PDF 4.5MB]
Brings together tourism data, research and reports from a wide range of sources into one easy-to-use tool
Broad coverage for different working arrangements
Broad discretion when considering national interest
Broadband and Internet New Zealand Limited
Broadband and mobile programmes
Broadband deployment update: December 2017 [PDF 586KB]
Broadband deployment update: December 2018 [PDF 1.2MB]
Broadband deployment update: June 2017 [PDF 971KB]
Broadband deployment update: June 2018 [PDF 565KB]
Broadband deployment update: March 2017 [PDF 1.1MB]
Broadband deployment update: March 2018 [PDF 674KB]
Broadband deployment update: September 2017 [PDF 819KB]
Broadband deployment update: September 2018 [PDF 1005KB]
Broadly speaking this document is somewhat of an appendix with a fancy cover in some ways. We look at first the available bioresources and in-sector capabilities. What do we have to work with? We look at aquaculture, forestry, arable crops, wine/grapes, etc and look at what is going on in each of those. We then look at the supporting capabilities around that which we defined as smart people, good ideas and useful capital and then finally we talk about why it is so hard to develop new platforms.
Browsing the work programme of the relevant Cluster for open and forthcoming calls by following the links above
Budget 2024 Bilateral: Further Information and Savings Options [PDF 1.4MB]
Budget 2024 proactive release documents
Budget 2024: Energy Portfolio Information for your discussion with Hon David Seymour [PDF 2.6MB]
Budget 2024: Hon Louise Upston summary portfolio information for your discussion with Hon David Seymour [PDF 375KB]
Budget 2024: Options for Geohazards Budget Bid [PDF 1.7MB]
Budget 2024: Regional Development summary portfolio information for your discussion with Hon David Seymour [PDF 520KB]
Budget 2024: Resources summary portfolio information for bilateral discussion with Hon David Seymour [PDF 145KB]
Budget initiatives, research agencies, the Vision Matauranga Policy and Science Board information.
Budget overview of the $400 million Tourism Recovery Package
Budget significant initiatives
Build a skilled workforce so workers have the skills they need to achieve their career aspirations
Build a skilled workforce so workers have the skills they need to achieve their career aspirations.
Build brand for a New Zealand-Aotearoa holiday, making New Zealand-Aotearoa a preferred and aspirational destination among the most discerning travellers.
Building (Earthquake-prone Building Deadlines and Other Matters) Amendment Bill: Approval for Introd...
Building (Pool Manufacturers and Retailers) notice 2017
Building (Pools) Amendment Act 2016
Building (Pools) Regulations 2016
Building Code fire safety review discussion document
Building Consent System Performance Monitoring - Quarterly update
Building Controls Updates newsletter
Building Performance Website
Building Performance website
Building Practitioners Board
Building System Insights Programme
Building System Performance
Building System Regulatory Strategy
Building a regenerative model for tourism is important for ensuring the long-term sustainability and resilience of tourism. As tourism is a significant sector of our economy, building a regenerative tourism sector will also contribute to wider efforts to decarbonise our economy.
Building a stronger weather forecasting system
Building and Construction
Building and Construction Sector Trends Reporting Package
Building and Construction Sector Trends: Annual report
Building and construction
Building and construction closed consultations
Building and construction consultations
Building and construction regulation
Building consent system review: Options paper summary of submissions
Building failure investigations
Building regulatory system
Building regulatory system charter
Building research and data
Building resilience must carefully balance the risks with the cost of mitigation to the sector and ultimately consumers. A reserve of 28 days will enable New Zealand to better ride out smaller disruptions and, in the event of a major supply event, allow time for other solutions to be put in place.
Building the cycle trails
Building, Resources and Markets
Building, Resources and Markets is headed by Deputy Secretary Paul Stocks.
Built environment use case for Digital Twin
Bus and Coach Association
Business Events Activity Survey (2009-2019)
Business Events Delegate Survey (2009-2019)
Business Events Industry Association
Business Events Research Programme (2009-2019)
Business Groups management: Identify and manage risks in day-to-day operations (1st line)
Business Mentors New Zealand
Business New Zealand paper on Economic Resilience and Just Transitions [PDF 89KB]
Business New Zealand paper on Workforce Development Priorities [PDF 99KB]
Business advisory support
Business and consumer research
Business and consumer research into awareness, attitudes, and understanding of their rights, obligations and responsibilities.
Business expenditure on research and development (BERD)
Business group management: Identify and manage risks in day-to-day operations (First Line)
Business growth and innovation data
Business operations survey information releases
Business specific networks
Business/Skilled visa stream
BusinessNZ and the NZCTU for targeted consultation on t he technical aspects of the Bill
BusinessNZ response on the Future of Work for Women [PDF 166KB]
Businesses can find out about what support may be available to them, or register their interest for support, by visiting the Qualmark website.
Businesses that intend to claim the tax incentive can enrol via myIR before they officially apply by submitting a General Approval or a Criteria and Methodologies Application. Enrolment will provide businesses with an initial assessment of their eligibility and key information about how to apply.
Businesses use standards and conformance to support innovation and development, and compete locally and internationally.
Businesses with a tourism focus looking for support from the RBPN business advisory service should visit the Regional Business Partner Network website for more information including eligibility criteria.
Businesses with uncertain or changing demand for their products or services can benefit from offering flexible, short-term contracts. People may choose to accept work as a contractor to suit their individual lifestyle and preferences. Contracts for services are an important way for businesses to access specialist skills which they would not be able to retain in-house.
But on the other side supporting technology, what's really changing is all that supporting technology that's making digital twins more powerful, shall we say. And so we have artificial intelligence, which can connect up all these different data streams into that twin structure. We have automated robotics and automation. And the more that comes in, the more that's information to feed into digital twin. The Internet of Things, more and more sensors, in objects and machinery. I've got an oven at home that's connected to the internet, which freaks me out I have to say. But my wife loves it. So those things are happening all the time.
But please let us know what is your role in these sectors.
But the impact of COVID-19 on the tourism sector has been severe. International visitor arrivals to New Zealand decreased 98.6% and the number of people directly employed in tourism decreased by a third.
But worldwide we are also seeing tourism return at pace and there is pent-up demand from our key markets to travel internationally again.
Buy Now Pay Later (BNPL) is a relatively new credit alternative in New Zealand. By using BNPL, consumers can access goods or services now but pay for them later in a series of interest-free instalments.
By contrast, pirated and counterfeit goods are infringing goods that have been produced or sold overseas without the consent of the relevant copyright or trade mark owner. The Copyright Act 1994 and Trade Marks Act 2002 provide criminal offences for importing pirated and counterfeit goods for resale.
By default, all ANZSRC code information will be released. However, some ANZSRC codes could be considered sensitive and could lead to the prejudice and/or safety of the person(s) and/or organisation(s) that submitted the data. If you require MBIE to mask or remove these sensitive codes, please contact your MBIE Investment Manager.
By following the Tiaki Promise, visitors are making a commitment to act as a guardian, protecting and preserving Aotearoa during their visit.
By framing economic well-being and financial literacy as a key component of overall well-being, we are more likely to attract Pacific communities to financial capability programmes, as it aligns with Pacific worldviews.
By putting a focus on diversity we can make sure that we capture the very best ideas and talent to support the highest quality research. We believe that everyone should have a fair and equal opportunity to participate in the science system to their fullest potential.
By submitting, posting or displaying your content on any of our social media accounts, you grant us a non-exclusive, transferable, sub-licensable, royalty-free, worldwide licence to use that content.
By supporting and investing in tech, we can promote economic growth and employment in New Zealand. We can boost the tech sector by attracting and retaining the skills and expertise needed to help tech firms grow.
By using or accessing our social media pages, you are considered to have consented to the conditions of use of the particular social media channel and our individual page or account. These terms of use apply to all of our social media channels and tools, unless otherwise specified.
By working together we will flourish and achieve greatness
C OVERSHEET Minister Hon Brooke van Velden Portfolio Workplace Relations and Safety Title of Cabinet paper Holidays Act Reform: Consultation document for targeted consultation Date to be published 14 October 2024 Li st of documents that have been proactively released Date Title Author August 2024 Holidays Act Reform: Consultation document for targeted consultation Office of Workplace Relations and Safety Minister August 2024 Appendix Two: Summary of key proposals and alternative options included in the consultation document Office of Workplace Relations and Safety Minister 28 August 2024 Holidays Act Reform: Approval to Consult ECO -24-MIN-0177 Minute Cabinet Office 17 June 2024 2324 -3811 Holidays Act Reform: Decisions on sick leave for the exposure draft MBIE I nformation redacted YES A ny information redacted in this document is redacted in accordance with MBIE’s policy on Proactive Release and is labelled with the reason for redaction. This may include information that would be redacted if this information was requested under Official Information Act 1982. Where this is the case, the reasons for withholding information are listed below. Where information has been withheld, no public interest has been identified that would outweigh the reasons for withholding it. S ome information has been withheld for the reasons of privacy of natural persons, confidential advice to Government, free and frank opinions, and legal professional privilege. © Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT HTKINA WHAKATUTUKI BRIEFING Holidays Act Reform: Decisions on sick leave for the exposure draft Date: 17 June 2024 Priority: High Security In Confidence Tracking 2324-3811 classification: number: Action sought Minister Action souaht Deadline Hon Brooke van Velden Indicate your preferred approach for 25 June 2024 Minister for Workplace pro-rating sick leave in the upcoming Relations and Safety exposure draft Contact for telephone discussion (if required) Name Position Telephone Alison Marris Manager, Employment (04)901 8564Standards Policy Principal Advisor, Simon Cooke Employment Standards (04)901 8173 Policy The following department s/agencies have been consulted D Treasury □MoJ □MFAT□MPI Minister's office to complete: Comments: □NZTE □MfE D Other: D Approved D Noted □Seen□MSD □DIA D See Minister's Notes 1st contact l2riv_acy__J N/A □TEC□MoE □TPK□MoH D Declined D Needs change D Overtaken by Events D Withdrawn Note: MBIE's recommendations in this briefing were for t he limited purpose of determining a pro-rata sick leave option for consultation. They do not have the status of final policy recommendations or decisions. Further advice will be provided in due course taking into account consultation feedback and a wider range of options. 2324 -3811 In Confidence 2 BRIEFING Holidays Act Reform: Decisions on sick leave for the exposure draft Date: 17 June 2024 Priority: High Security classification: In Confidence Tracking number: 2324 -3811 Purpose To seek decisions on your preferred approach for including a pro -rata approach to sick leave in the upcoming exposure draft Bill (the ED). Executive summary On 27 May 2024 Cabinet endorsed your next steps for Holidays Act reform : issuing an exposure draft Bill (ED) and consultation document for targeted consultation in September 2024 [ECO -24- MIN-0081] . The ED will largely be based on decisions made by the previous Government , with some policy changes to improve workability and reduce compliance costs . The consultation document will seek feedback on options that depart more significantly from th e existing framework. Cabinet decided that the provision of sick leave entitlement in the ED should include a pro -rata approach. This decision reflects employer feedback about the cost of the 202 0 decision to increase sick leave from 5 to 10 days a year for all eligible employees, regardless of working pattern. You have delegated authority to decide the detail of a pro -rata sick leave approach for the ED. While there is a large range of potential options for this (including hours - or weeks -based accrual as suggested by business stakeholders ), the need to work within the ED’s underlying framework to be ready for consultation in September limits the options significantly. There are three main design choices: (1) whether to keep a base of 5 days for all employees, or scale the entire 10 -day entitlement, (2) the basis for the scaling method (hours worked or days worked), and (3) the entitlement scale itself (ie how particular work patterns correspond to different numbers of days of sick leave). MBIE recommends the following choices (noting that more significant changes could be considered via the consultation document): •Retain ing a 5-day ‘floor’ for all eligible employees , and scaling the remaining 5 days of entitlement based on work patterns . •Basing the scalin g method on the number of days per week on which work is performed . •An entitlement scale that provides four tiers of entitlement : The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE )’s complete recommended approach is summarised in Annex Two . Your decisions on this briefing can provide enough detail for MBIE to issue drafting instructions. This could be achieved either by agreeing to (or providing feedback on) Annex Two, or by indicating which of the discrete design choices you would decide differently. In the latter case, MBIE would report back to y ou to flesh out your preferred approach for the ED. Confidential advice to Government Confidential advice to Government Confidential advice to Government 2324 -3811 In Confidence 3 Recommended action MBIE recommends that you: a Note Cabinet decided that the sick leave entitlement should be pro -rated so that there is “some proportionality between an employee’s sick leave entitlement and the quantum of work they perform each week” [ECO -24-MIN-0081 refers] Noted b Note that you have delegated authority to make decisions on the detail of the pro-rata approach, so that this can be included in the upcoming exposure draft Bill (the ED) which you intend to release for targeted consultation in September 2024 Noted c Note that the timeframe for policy development and drafting require the ED’s pro-rata approach to remain consistent with the existing framework (see Annex One ), but a lternative options involving fundamental changes to the end -to-end system (such as an hours or weeks -based accrual model) can be explored through the consultat ion document that will accompany the ED Noted d Note the three main design choices for the ED are: i. whether the entire entitlement ( 10 day s) should be subject to scaling ii. the general basis for scaling different employees’ sick leave entitlements ( based on either the number of hours or the number of days an employee works per week ) iii. the entitlement scale itself (with a key choice being h ow closely the total entitlement should reflect work patterns) Noted e Note that Cabinet agree d to a revised ‘accumulation profile ’ for eligible employees to become entitled to the full sick leave entitlement over their first six months of employment (2 days at the start of employment, a further 4 days after 3 months, and the remaining 4 days after 6 months ) Noted f Note that a 5-day floor for all eligible employees would allow th e agreed accumulation profile (described in recommendation e) to be retained with minimal adjustment and drafting complexity , but scaling the entire 10 -day entitlement would require more fundamenta l rework ing Noted g Note the complete ‘straw person’ option for the ED (Annex Two ), which adopts MBIE’s recommendations for each of the design choices described in recommendation d , with minimal change to the accumulation profile described in recommendation e , and includes the following scaled approach to the annual sick leave entitlement: Work pattern Annual entitlement 1-2 days per week 5 days 3 days per week 7 days 4 days per week 8 days 5 or more days per week 10 days Noted h For the purpose of the ED , either: i. Agree to the complete ‘straw person’ option set out in Annex Two Agree I Agree subject to minor feedback I Disagree OR ii.Indicate (by circling your preferred options below) the areas where your design choices differ from those recommended by MBIE: Issue 1: Whether the entire entitlement should be scaled Option A Option B Provide an entitlement of at least five days of Scale the entire 10-day FTE entitlement to reflect sick leave for all eligible employees (only the work patterns (acknowledging that some remaining 5 days would be scaled to reflect employees would be entitled to less sick leave work patterns) than the minimum standard that applied from MBIE preferred option 2003 to 2021) Issue 2: The basis for scaling employees' entitlements Option A Option B Number of calendar days per week on which Number of hours worked per week (an average work is performed (an average would be used would be used in some circumstances) in some circumstances) MBIE preferred option Issue 3: The scaling approach Option A: Low precision Option B: Medium precision Option C: Maximum For example, a binary model (5 Three or four entitlement tiers precision days for part-time; 10 days for depending on individual work Multiple tiers (5+) to maximise full-time) to maximise simplicity patterns proportionality between MBIE preferred option entitlement and work pattern (balancing simplicity and fairness) Note that in drafting the ED, an issue may arise about consequential changes to the 'maximum current entitlement' and 'maximum carryover ' provisions (relating to employees' ability to retain unused sick leave at the end of an entitlement year) Agree that the 'maximum current entitlement' should remain unchanged at 20 days, as per the status quo, and that consequential amendments may be required to related provisions. Alison Marris Manager, Employment Standards Policy Labour, Science and Enterprise MBIE 17/06/2021 2324-3811 Hon Brooke van Velden Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety .....I......I..... . In Confidence 4 2324 -3811 In Confidence 5 Your decisions are needed to give effect to Cabinet’s direction on pro - rated sick leave 1. On 27 May, Cabinet agreed to your proposed policy changes related to the Holidays Act reform that will be included in the ED for consultation in September 2024 [ECO -24-MIN-0081 refers] . As part of these decisions, Cabinet agreed that the statutory sick leave entitlement – currently 10 days per year for all eligible employees1 – should be pro -rated “so that there is some proportionality between an employee’s sick leave entitlement and the quantum of work they perform each week .” You have delegated authority to make decisions on the detail of a pro - rata approach for inclusion in the ED. 2. The ED will be accompanied by a consultation document designed to elicit feedback on the ED’s underlying policy choices , as well as to seek feedback on whether more significant policy changes are needed. Alternative pro-rata options to the one you select for the ED can be included in that document. Cabinet noted that you will report back on the content of the consultation document in August 2024. 3. Design decisions for a pro -rata approach are needed soon so that drafting of this aspect can get underway for the ED. We would also value an early steer on any alternative s you wish to seek feedback on through the consultation document (this will need to be ready for agency and Ministerial consultation by mid-July). Cabinet ’s decisions limit the range of practical options for the ED 4. The ED will retain the underlying sick leave entitlement framework of the existing Holidays Act 2003 (the Act) , based around the entitlement being expressed as a whole number of ‘days ’. Based on the decisions made to date, i t will include changes to the eligibility criteria , the timing of sick leave entitlement s, and to the method for paying sick leave ( the status quo and agreed changes are summarised in Annex One ). 5. We have assumed that , for the ED, Cabinet’s intent is to design a pro-rata approach for consultation purposes that is consistent with this underlying framework. This reflects the need to finalise the ED before September 2024, and that more fundamental changes would need longer to design. 6. For the ED, these considerations rule out some pro -rata options that might be favoured by business stakeholders . Alternative options for achieving proportionality can, however, be described and assessed in the consultati on document for stakeholder comment. You have several design choices 7. Noting the need to work within the existing framework, the key policy and design choices are: a) Whether the entire sick leave entitlement (10 days) should be scaled to reflect working patterns , b) The general basis for scaling different employees’ total entitlements. c) The entitlement scale itself 1 In 2020 the previous Government agreed to increase the minimum sick leave entitlement from five days to ten days per year [CAB -20- MIN-0474] and this was implemented through the Holidays (Increasing Sick Leave) Amendment Act in 2021. Free and frank opinions Confidential advice to Government Confidential advice to G Confidential advice to Government 2324 -3811 In Confidence 6 8. The briefing also seeks direction on two more minor design issues: a) Adjusting the sick leave ‘accumulation profile ’ recently agreed by Cabinet (how new employees progressively accumulate sick leave when starting a job) . Discussion of this matter is included in relation to the first design choice (paragraphs 18-20). b) A consequential issue relating to the “maximum current entitlement” (a provision in the current Act). Analysis: Design choices for the ED 9. Each of the main design choices is considered separately below . We have set out the viable options and stated MBIE’s preferred option for each. 10. The design choices build on each other. The first two design choice s have flow-on consequences for the range of options available for the third (the scaling approach). We have only described detailed options for the scaling approach that are consistent with MBIE’s recommendations for the first two design choices . If you disagree with those initial recommendations , we will need to report back to you with more detai l to flesh out the alternatives for the ED . 11. In making our recommendations we have applied criteria based on those that have guided Cabinet’s recent decisions on the Holidays Act review .2 The key criteria we have applied are clarity and simplicity , ease of implementation, reducing the potential costs of sick leave for employer s, and employee access to sick leave . 12. We have referred to ‘ potential costs’ because sick leave is a needs -based entitlement, so employers only incur costs when sick leave is actually used. A higher total annual entitlement does not necessarily translate to greater use by employees. 13. Ease of implementation refers both to implementation by end -users (including in payroll systems) and ease of implementation within the ED (drafting ease and minimal disturbance of other policy decisions). 14. Annex Two sets out a complete ‘straw person’ option, based on adopting all of MBIE’s design recommendations. Issue 1: Whether the entire sick leave entitlement (10 days) should be scaled to reflect work patterns 2 Confidential advice to Government Confidential advice to Government 2324 -3811 In Confidence 7 Issue 2: The basis for scaling different employees’ sick leave entitlements Confidential advice to Government Confidential advice to Government 2324 -3811 In Confidence 8 Issue 3: How closely an individual’s entitlement should reflect their work pattern Confidential advice to Government Confidential advice to Government 2324 -3811 In Confidence 9 We also seek your confirmation of MBIE’s intended approach to one minor issue Treatment of the ‘maximum current entitlement’ (ie how unused sick leave from previous years is treated) 39. The current Act contains a provision (s ection 66) on carrying over unused sick leave to any subsequent 12 -month period of employment . An employee may carry over up to 1 0 days of unused sick leave , to a maximum of 20 days ’ current entitlement in any year . This does not prevent parties from agreeing to carry over higher levels of unused sick leave. If this happens, any accumulated days of sick leave greater than 20 will be a contractual entitlement, rather than a statutory one. 40. In drafting the ED, the issue of whether consequential changes to this provision are needed is likely to arise. In MBIE’s view, it is the maximum current entitlement of sick leave, rather than the maximum amount that can be carried over between years, that is the substantive policy Confidential advice to Government 2324 -3811 In Confidence 10 setting in the current Act (the ‘maximum carryover’ is a mathematical consequence of the maximum current entitlement) . This was confirmed by the previous Government in its decision to adjust the ‘maximum carryover’ amount downwards (from 15 days to 10 days) when doubling the sick leave entitlement from 5 to 10 days. The maximum current entitlement remained unchanged (20 days). 41. We therefore recommend maintaining the maximum current entitlement at 20 days and noting that a consequential amendment may be needed in light of pro -rating (as different employees will become entitled to different ‘new’ amounts of sick leave on their respective 12 -month leave anniversaries) . Next steps 42. We have structured this briefing with the aim of ensuring that your decisions provide sufficient detail to be used as the basis for drafting instructions. This is possible either by: a) indicating your agreement to the ‘straw person’ complete option contained in Annex Two, or b) providing feedback on any/all of the discrete design choices in this briefing (where your preference differs from MBIE’s recommendation). 43. If you adopt the latter approach, we will provide you with an alternative complete option for your consideration as soon as possible, based on your design choice s, with the aim of allowing drafting to begin as soon as possible. 44. Work is also underway on the consultat ion document, which will provide scope for consider ing options that would go further towards achieving the simplicity you have indicated you wish to prioritise. In the context of pro -rating sick leave, we think these options could include: a) Weeks -based accrual b) Hours -based accrual (used in Australian employment standards). Annexes Annex One: Summary of the current framework for the statutory sick leave entitlement Annex Two: Complete ‘straw person’ option (adopting all MBIE’s recommended design choices) Free and frank opinions 2324 -3811 In Confidence 11 Annex One: Summary of the current underlying framework for sick leave Current settings in the Holidays Act 2003 The basic framework 1. The Act provides a minimum entitlement of 10 days’ paid sick leave per year for employees, which can be used when an employee (or their partner or dependant) is sick or injured. The entitlement for sick leave is not pro -rated, meaning a ten day entitlement per year applies regardless of whether the employee works full -time or part -time. 2. The entitlement to sick leave arises after an employee has worked for six months with the same employer, either continuously or, over a 6 month period, for an average of at least 10 hours a week, including at least one hour a week and 40 hours a month. The Act also states that employees can carry over up to 1 0 days of unused sick leave, to a maximum of 20 days’ current entitlement in any year. 3. As with other minimum employment standards legislation, the sick leave provisions provide a ‘bottom line’ entitlement. Employers and employees are free to agree on more favourable sick leave arrangements and many workplaces do go above the minimum standard . Any changes to the minimum standard would not necessarily mean that more favourable terms (in employment agreements) would be unwound. Taking sick leave 4. It is only possible to take sick leave on a day that would otherwise have been a working day. ‘Sparse’ working patterns should in themselves reduce the likelihood of sick leave being taken . Relatively generous entitlements for part -time employees do not necessarily result in disproportionate sick leave costs for those employees. Payment for sick leave 5. Sick leave is paid by the employer at the rate of relevant daily pay (the amount of pay that the employee would have received had the employee worked on the day concerned), or in some circumstances may be paid at the rate of average daily pay (the employee’s gross earnings for a defined period divided by the number of whole or p art days the employee worked or was on paid leave during that period). 6. The payment methodology means that payment for sick leave is responsive to work pattern (even though the total entitlement, ie the number of yearly opportunities to be on paid sick leave, is not). ‘Relevant Da ily Pay’ adjusts to the hours the employee would have worked on the specific day they are sick. For example, if an employee is sick on a day they would usually work four hours, they would be paid for four hours. If they are sick on a day they would usually work 8 hours, they would be paid for 8 hours. However, if Relevant Daily Pay cannot be calculated (eg because an employee’s daily pay varies) sick leave pay will based on a daily average. Modifications to the sick leave framework already agreed to be included in the ED 7. In accordance with Cabinet policy decisions made to date, the ED will retain the underlying sick leave entitlement framework of the existing Act, based around the entitlement being expressed as a whole number of ‘days ’. Key changes currently agreed to the settings are sick leave availability from day one of employment, new eligibility criteria for F amily Violence, Beareavement, and Sick (FBS) leave and a new single payment calculation. Sick leave availability from day one of employment 8. Rather than the current six -month waiting period, under the ED eligible employees will begin to accumulate their sick leave entitlement from the first day of employment , reaching 10 days after six months of employment (not e that the accumulation profile below will need to be adjusted to account for the agreed pro -rata approach) . a) For employees eligible for sick leave from the first day of employment, 10 days’ sick leave will accumulate over a timeframe of six months. They will be entitled to two days 2324 -3811 In Confidence 12 on day one, a further four days after three months and a further four days (ie the full entitlement) after six months. b) For employees eligible for sick leave after three months of employment, sick leave will accumulate over a timeframe of three months. They will be entitled to six days when they become eligible and then a further four days (ie the full entitlement) after si x months. c) For employees eligible for sick leave after six months of employment, the full entitlement of 10 days will be provided upon becoming eligible (aligned with the current six -month timeframe). 9. From the second year of employment onwards , full sick leave entitlement is provided on eligible employee’s 12 month employment anniversary date New eligibility criteria for FBS leave 10. To support the provision of sick leave from day one of employment, the ED includes new criteria to determine whether an employee is eligible for FBS leave. All employees with agreed hours of work specified in their employment agreement will be eligible fro m the first day of employment, other employees will become eligible after three months if they have worked an average of 10 hours or more per week. New consolidated p ayment methodology 11. The ED will include a new single payment calculation. It does not require employers to apply judgement, meaning that it can be used in all employment situations. It is based on the hours an employee would have worked on a day of sick leave, meaning that, like the current R elevant Daily Pay calculation it will be responsive to work that would have been formed on a specific day of leave. 12. The consolidated calculation comprises four parts: a base rate for wages or salary an employee would have earned on the day plus fixed allowances plus an hourly average of productivity or incentive payments received plus the cash value of board and lodgings. 2324 -3811 In Confidence 13 Annex Two: Complete ‘straw person’ pro-rata option for the ED (adopting all recommended design choices) Basis for th e straw person option 1. The following option sets out, in full, how MBIE would propose to reflect Cabinet’s decision in the ED (to ensure “there is some proportionality between an employee’s sick leave entitlement and the quantum of work they perform each week” [ECO -24-MIN-0081 r efers]). 2. The option adopts all of MBIE’s recommended design choices for the ED described in this briefing. It also: a) assumes the underlying framework for the ED is retained (see Annex One) , and b) demonstrates a “minimum viable change” to the sick leave accumulation profile recently agreed by Cabinet (in the context of this set of design choices) . MBIE’s complete straw person option for building proportional sick leave into the ED The basic framework 3. Rather than all eligible employees being entitled to 10 days of sick leave per year (as per the status quo), all eligible employees are entitled to 5 + n days of sick leave per year, where n is a variable amount of days determined by reference to an individual employee’s work pattern. 4. The scaling calculation (to determine n) is based on: a) The agreed number of calendar days per week on which work is performed (per the employment agreement), or b) If there is no agreed number of days per week on which work is performed, or if the agreed number of days varies from week to week (which can occur under roster arrangements), an average number of days per week over the reference period. 5. The number of extra days (n) will vary according to employees’ work patterns as set out in the table below. Work pattern Entitlement o utcome 1-2 days a week 0 extra days (total entitlement is 5 days) 3 days per week 2 extra days (total entitlement is 7 days) 4 days per week 3 extra days (total entitlement is 8 days) 5 or more days per week 5 extra days (total entitlement is 10 days) 6. For consistency with the underlying framework of the ED, an averaging method will sometimes be used . The following specifications will apply: a) If an employee has an agreed number of days per week on which work is performed included in their employment agreement that are the same in each seven day period, their entitlement would be based on that number of days. b) If an employee has an agreed number of days of work that vary between seven day periods (for example they work a nine day fortnight or a rotating shift cycle) their entitlement would be based on the average number of agreed days per week. c) If an eligible employee does not have an agreed number of days in their employment agreement, their entitlement would be based on an average of the number of days per week on which work was performed over the last 52 weeks (or 26 weeks in the first year of employment). 2324 -3811 In Confidence 14 d) If entitlement is based on averages, the number of days would be rounded up. For example if an employee works a nine day fortnight and works an average of 4.5 days per week, this would be rounded up to five days. The accumulation profile of sick leave entitlement for year one of employment 7. The accumulation profile is summarised in the table below (and compared to the May 2024 Cabinet decision). The recommended approach allows for minimal adjustment to the accumulation profile that Cabinet already agreed to. Proposed approach for ED (reflecting partial scaling of entitlement) Approach agreed by Cabinet in May 2024 Day one of employment Eligible employees receive 2 days Eligible employees receive 2 days After three months of employment Already eligible employees receive an extra 3 days (to total 5 days) Newly eligible employees receive 5 days Already eligible employees receive an extra 4 days (to total 6 days) Newly eligible employees receive 6 days After six months of employment Already eligible employees receive the extra number of days (n) that corresponds to their work pattern (to total 5 + n) Newly eligible employees receive the total number of days (5 + n) that corresponds to their work pattern Already eligible employees receive an extra 4 days (to total 10 days) Newly eligible employees receive full entitlement (10 days) On each 12 month anniversary of receiving the full entitlement All eligible employees receive their next full entitlement (5 + n days ) All eligible employees receive their next full entitlement (10 days) 8. The main adjustment needed is that employees who become eligible for sick leave on day one of employment, or during their first three months of employment, would become entitled to 5 days of sick leave at the 3 -month point ( rather than 6 days , as Cabinet had previously agreed ). 9. Only the extra 5 days of entitlement that arises at the 6 -month point would be subject to scaling (using the methodology described above ). For employees who become eligible to sick leave for the first time at the 6 -month mark, their entire yearly entitlement would be calculated at that point.
CATEGORY B: IMPROVEME NTS TO THE OPERATION AND EFFECTIVENESS
CATEGORY C: ENABLING FUTURE RESPONSIVENESS CATEGORY D: OTHER
CC-BY 4.0 International license terms
COMMENT : Insert comments
COVERSHEET Minister Hon Brooke van Velden Portfolio Workplace Relations and Safety Title of Cabinet paper Holidays Act Reform: Consultation document for targeted consultation Date to be published 14 October 2024
COVERSHEET Minister Hon Brooke van Velden Portfolio Workplace Relations and Safety Title of Cabinet paper Holidays Act Reform: Further Policy Decisions Date to be published 19 June 2024
COVERSHEET Minister Hon Michael Wood Portfolio Workplace Relations and Safety Title of Cabinet paper Government Response to the Report of the Holidays Act Taskforce Date to be published 23 February 2021
COVID-19 Consumer Travel Reimbursement Scheme (the Scheme)
COVID-19 Innovation Acceleration Fund
COVID-19 Response and Recovery Funding
COVID-19 Response: Tourism sector recovery plan
COVID-19 consumer impacts study reports
COVID-19 economic data - pre-August 2021
COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on building system actors
COVID-19 research database
COVID-19 response recognition award
CTU and Business NZ view on support for displaced workers [PDF 139KB]
CTU comments for 27 July 2020 Future of Work Tripartite Forum [PDF 162KB]
CTU definition of good work [PDF 168KB]
Cabinet Circular CO (22) 2 Cabinet Fees Framework [PDF 827KB]
Cabinet Office circular CO(02) 5
Cabinet accepted the Holidays Act Taskforce recommendation that employees should continue to become entitled to four weeks’ AL after 12 months continuous employment but
Cabinet ag reed that, for all leave types, the calculation would be based on the average number of hours that an employee has worked on the same calendar day in the previous 13 weeks (the ‘calendar day ’ methodology). This calculation would need to be carried out for each day of leave an employee takes.
Cabinet agreed on a number of proposals relating to consumer credit regulation.
Cabinet agreed seeking in-principle for NIWA to acquire MetService.
Cabinet agreed that during a closedown period, an employer must allow an
Cabinet agreed to apply the CCCFA to Buy-Now, Pay-Later.
Cabinet agreed to further decisions to support the package of reforms to modernise the Companies Act.
Cabinet agreed to introduce the Accident Compensation (Interest on Instalment Plans) Amendment Bill.
Cabinet agreed to make regulations that enable a consumer data right in the banking sector.
Cabinet agreed to policy decisions for an amendment to the Regulations.
Cabinet agreed to proposals for inclusion in the Accident Compensation (Interest on Instalment Plans) Amendment Bill.
Cabinet agreed to publish an Employment Action Plan for New Zealand.
Cabinet agreed to some changes and additions to existing Cabinet policy decisions related to reform of the Holidays Act and noted the intention to release an exposure draft Bill.
Cabinet agreed to submit the Accident Compensation Levy Regulations to the Executive Council.
Cabinet agreed to the content of the consultation document for release alongside an exposure draft Bill for targeted consultation.
Cabinet approval to consult on areas for work health and safety reform.
Cabinet approved the Building (Earthquake-prone Building Deadlines and Other Matters) Amendment Bill for introduction.
Cabinet decisions expected on proposals on proposed legislation to address modern slavery and worker exploitation in operations and supply chains. Legislation is intended to be introduced in 2023.
Cabinet documents that set out policy decisions in relation to the draft Bill
Cabinet has agreed to changes to allow leave entitlements to be transferred in restructuring situations
Cabinet made policy decisions about the original Bills in July 2019. The COVID-19 pandemic delayed the progress of these Bills, and Cabinet decided in May 2021 to combine the original Bills with the amendments that had been identified for a fourth set of Bills.
Cabinet noted the proposals, but no decisions have been made.
Cabinet noted the update on the Employment Strategy and refresh of the Strategy.
Cabinet paper R&D tax incentive for implementation [PDF 113KB]
Cabinet paper on improvements to the TDL liability allocation process
Cabinet paper outlining the establishment of the New Zealand Screen Production Grant
Cabinet paper providing a progress update on the Employment Strategy and setting out the refresh of the Strategy.
Cabinet paper providing advice on a number of proposals relating to consumer credit regulation, resulting in the decisions in the minute.
Cabinet paper seeking agreement to draft regulations that enable a consumer data right in the banking sector
Cabinet paper seeking agreement to introduce the Accident Compensation (Interest on Instalment Plans) Amendment Bill.
Cabinet paper seeking agreement to proposals for inclusion in the Accident Compensation (Interest on Instalment Plans) Amendment Bill.
Cabinet paper seeking agreement to publicly consult on proposed levy rates for 2025/26, 2026/27, and 2027/28.
Cabinet paper seeking agreement to publish an Employment Action Plan for New Zealand.
Cabinet paper seeking agreement to some changes and additions to existing Cabinet policy decisions related to reform of the Holidays Act and noting the intention to release an exposure draft Bill.
Cabinet paper seeking agreement to submit the Accident Compensation Levy Regulations to the Executive Council.
Cabinet paper seeking approval for introduction of the Building (Earthquake-prone Building Deadlines and Other Matters) Amendment Bill.
Cabinet paper seeking approval to apply the CCCFA to Buy-Now, Pay-Later.
Cabinet paper seeking approval to consult on areas for work health and safety reform.
Cabinet paper seeking approval to the content of the consultation document for release alongside an exposure draft Bill for targeted consultation.
Cabinet paper seeking further decisions to support the package of reforms to modernise the Companies Act.
Cabinet paper seeking in-principle agreement for NIWA to acquire MetService.
Cabinet paper seeking policy decisions for an amendment to the Regulations.
Cabinet paper: 100-days commitments: A fairer workplace relations system
Cabinet paper: Easter Sunday shop trading amendment
Cabinet paper: Employment Relations Amendment Bill: Outstanding Issues and Approval for Introduction
Cabinet papers and decisions relating to the review framework.
Cabinet papers and minutes
Cabinet papers reporting on the Employment Strategy
Cabinet response to the review
Cairo has developed a commercially viable product and a start-up business called Cattle Credit to scale up his idea for use on farms. His next steps include developing industry partnerships, engaging potential customers, and securing pre-seed funding.
Call recording and email retention
Call the MBIE Service Centre on
Call us if you believe you are being exploited, you are concerned another person is being exploited or if you want to report an unscrupulous employer.
Call us on 0800 20 90 20 or email
Callaghan Innovation (on Behalf of Toro Studios)
Callaghan Innovation is a Crown agent that provides products and services to enable businesses to invest more in research, science, engineering, technology and design, so that they can be more successful in the global market.
Callaghan Innovation website
Camilla Rutherford, Te Puia, Rotorua
Camping in vehicles at commercial campsites
Camping in vehicles on private land
Candidates on the final shortlist were submitted to NASA for final selection.
Candidates who are successfully selected for internship placement by NASA will be eligible to have the costs of their internship supported through the New Zealand Space Scholarship.
Canterbury Earthquakes Royal Commission website
Canterbury Regional Workforce Plan 2022
Canterbury labour market and skills shortage data
Capability and development
Capability of the applicant and supplier combined to deliver:
Capacity building modules on trafficking in persons, forced labour and slavery developed as part of the Hakili Matagi Immigration Core Elements Curriculum.
Capacity of the supplier to deliver:
Captioned relay services are available using the NZ Relay application for mobile phones and tablets.
Carbon capture, utilisation and storage
Carbon capture, utilisation, and storage (CCUS) is the process of capturing carbon dioxide (CO2) and either using it or storing it to prevent it from entering the atmosphere.
Careers Expo for rangatahi to explore potential pathways towards in the Agritech, Construction and Digital Technologies ITP sectors across Aoteaora New Zealand.
Careful consideration has been given to the privacy, security and confidentiality issues associated with using administrative and survey data in the IDI. Further detail can be found in the Privacy impact assessment for the IDI available from the Stats NZ website.
Carl Ramage, Rautaki Solutions
Carl is the Managing Partner of WNT Ventures, a pre-seed and seed-stage venture capital fund actively establishing and building deep tech companies. He has been actively involved in companies as diverse as AI/ML, Urban Mining, Advanced Manufacturing, Robotics, and Aerospace.
Carole Inkster, Infant Nutrition Council
Carolyn Tremain, Chief Executive
Carolyn has over 30 years' experience leading large, complex service delivery organisations, and substantial change management programmes.
Carolyn holds a Bachelor of Arts from Victoria University, Wellington.
Carrying and delivering letters for profit
Cartels and collaborative activities 2017
Case for adding home and community support workers to Employment Relations Act Schedule 1A [PDF 528KB]
Case study: Controlling access to Piopiotahi
Case study: Domestic tourism
Case study: How to exercise Tiaki in practice
Case study: Hundertwasser Art Centre
Case study: Manapouri infrastructure
Case study: Responsible Camping Ambassador Programmes
Case study: The Lake Dunstan Trail
Cash ing up leave: See “paying out some of the annual holiday entitlement” below.
Castalia report - Impact of reducing Rural Delivery frequency [PDF 1.3MB]
Catalyst Fund Investment Plan 2024-2028
Catalyst Fund Investment Plan published
Category 1 doesn't apply to shared property overseen by a governing body (eg, a body corporate). In this case, Category 1 installation methods will be subject to Category 2 consent requirements.
Category 2 methods have lasting impacts, eg, digging into and resealing a small part of a concrete drive to conceal a cable. For these installations, neighbours will be provided a high-level design of what is proposed and will have 15 working days to object, based on a limited number of grounds. If they don't object within that timeframe, their consent is deemed.
Cathy Webb, Seafood New Zealand
Causation is likely if there is a very specific population at a specific site and disease with no other likely explanation. The more specific an association between a factor and an effect is, the bigger the probability of a causal relationship.
Cebu Declaration on East Asian Energy Security
Celestial bodies, planets and stars
Central Government agencies are committed to paying 95% of domestic invoices within 10 working days.
Central Otago District Council
Central Radio Services Ltd
Central and local government strategies and policies, as well as regulatory and planning frameworks, determine the environment within which the tourism sector operates. This includes the location, type and scale of tourism activity permitted within an area.
Central government agencies payment times summary
Centre of Digital Excellence
Certifying self-contained vehicles as a Certification Authority
Chair and board member vacancies are generally advertised on MBIE's website.
Change since last quarter
Changes include MBIE updating its risk assessment template and providing more information to agencies on issues identified in previous applications and / or on similar issues.
Changes to ACC regulations for Chinese medicine, paramedics and audiometrists
Changes to Pool Safety Rules - Questions and Answers
Changes to a range of costs associated with the running of the Accredited Employers Programme, including administration fees, discounts, bulk-funded public health care costs, stop loss (where there is a high number of work-related accidents within a very short timeframe), and high-cost claims cover (limiting exposure to costs from a single event).
Changes to consumer credit law 2020
Changes to entitlements 23. The Taskforce proposes the following amendments to entitlement eligibility and availability:
Changes to hours of work law
Changes to personal grievances
Changes to register details
Changes to support the effective management of freedom camping in New Zealand.
Changes to telecommunications regulation and funding frameworks
Changes to temporary work visas
Changes to the Act introduced:
Changes to the Employment Relations Act which provide security officers with additional employment protections came into effect on 1 July 2021.
Changes to the Takeovers Code
Changes to the process for setting pay for Members of Parliament
Changes were made to section 99(1A) of the Credit Contracts and Consumer Finance Act (CCCFA) in 2019, following a review of this provision.
Charges by family travel group
Charges paid to TSO providers
Charter review and management
Chartered Professional Engineers Council
Chartered professional engineers
Charters and system assessments complement each other as shown in this diagram:
Charts of the daily variability of the importer margin on regular petrol and diesel are also available, based on data provided by
Chatham Island Postal Service Ltd
Check if your agency is already participating
Check out the National Broadband Map to see if you can access UFB. The map also provides details of who to contact if you are interested in upgrading your internet services.
Chemical Weapons (Prohibition) Act 1996
Chemical Weapons Convention
Chemical weapon prohibition
Chief Executive expenses disclosure
Chief Executive: David Walsh
Chief Legal Officer (Policy Owner)
Chief Operating Officer Immigration. The operational arm of INZ with a focus on Visa Operations and ensuring quality in decision-making.
Childcare Assistance presentation by Dr Suzy Morrissey [PDF 300KB]
China is an important SI&T partner for New Zealand and is currently our 4th highest partner in terms of co-publications. We have several collaborative mechanisms in place to support cooperation with China in the bilaterally agreed priority areas of food science, environmental science, and health and biomedical science. There are active joint research programmes covering each of these areas.
Chorus TSO Deed variation
Chorus extending its existing fibre network by approximately 3,100 kilometres, with some homes on route being provided with the opportunity of fibre-to-the-premise at urban prices
Chorus extending urban-like broadband speeds to 57% of rural customers
Chorus is the TSO provider of Network Service supporting delivery of Local Residential Telephone Service
Chorus upgraded over 1200 cabinets, which allowed over 110,000 households and businesses to access improved fixed line broadband.
Chris Houston / Dr Suzi Keeling, Beef + Lamb New Zealand
Chris Roberts, CE, Tourism Industry Aotearoa
Christchurch City Council
Christchurch International Airport Ltd
Christchurch meet-ups foster growth in aerospace industry
Christchurch, New Zealand
Christin Watson (July 2018 to March 2019)
Circular Economy Action Plan (2023)
Circular Economy and Bioeconomy
Circular Economy: From Commitments to Action
Circular economy for emissions reduction
Circular economy policy and regulatory areas
Circular economy practices exist in New Zealand within and across manufacturing subsectors. Subsectors differ greatly. However, they are connected through resource flows and face similar challenges, particularly around waste.
Circular economy standards
Circular economy strategies, policies and regulatory measures are increasing worldwide, including with our key trading partners
Circular economy-driven design
Circular measures are wide-ranging in nature and purpose
Circulate products and materials at the highest value
Circulation of a paper from MBIE on best practice considerations for survivor inclusion will be circulated between the Inter-Agency TIP Operations Group, Plan of Action Reference Group and civil society Advisory Group.
Citizens and permanent residents charges
Civil Aviation Authority (CAA)
Claimants are expected to look for work or participate in training or rehabilitation
Claimants will be offered support to get back to work
Claimants will need to remain in New Zealand while receiving payments, except when going overseas for things like funerals, weddings or health treatments.
Clarification is sought regarding the mechanisms for verifying compliance once conditions have been imposed. Ministry of Defence (seconded by the New Zealand Defence Force) Defence’s submission asked whether, when a condition is set in place, there is a mechanism that ensure a subsequent verification of compliance.
Clarity: The review is easy to understand
Classification of a letter
Clear methods, formulas and tests
Clearly communicate to clients that they must comply with their obligations or risk being sanctioned, by implementing the Traffic Light System and considering options for non-financial sanctions, including community work experience and money management.
Climate-related disclosures consultation paper
Climate: reduce carbon emissions in the tourism sector or have a positive impact on the climate.
Clinical and epidemiological knowledge: How well Schedule 2 reflects this current knowledge
Close Fleet Saver for entry and renewal from 1 July 2025, then completely close the programme from 30 June 2029.
Closed: 01 April 2025, 5pm
Closed: 04 April 2025, 5pm
Closed: 07 February 2025, 5pm
Closed: 08 April 2025, 5pm
Closed: 11 February 2025, 5pm
Closed: 14 February 2025, 5pm
Closed: 18 March 2025, 5pm
Closed: 28 February 2025, 5pm
Closedown period: Employers can have a customary closedown of all or part of thei r operations once a year and can require employees to take annual holidays during the closedown, even if an employee has to take unpaid leave. Christmas is the most common time for a closedown, although it can occur at any time of year (Section s 29 to 35 o f the Act ).
Closer Economic Relations with Australia and the Trans-Tasman Mutual Recognition Arrangement
Closure of MBIE Pacific Economic Development Programmes [PDF 275KB]
Cloud computing, machine learning and the Hubble Space Telescope
Cluster 2: Culture, Creativity and Inclusive Society
Cluster 2: Culture, heritage and inclusive society
Cluster 3: Civil Security for Society
Cluster 3: Civil security and society
Cluster 4: Digital, Industry and Space
Cluster 4: Digital, technology and space
Cluster 5: Climate, Energy and Mobility
Cluster 5: Climate, energy and mobility
Cluster 6: Food, bioeconomy, natural resources, agriculture and environment
Cluster Munitions Prohibition Act 2009
Co-funding is not required. Participating organisations are free to contribute co-funding if they wish. The use or level of co-funding does not influence the outcome of applications.
Co-funding of 50% will be required
Coastal, Estuarine and Marine environments
Code of Conduct for Crown entity board members
Code of Conduct for employees, contractors and consultants
Code of Conduct for the Directors of Public Finance Act 1989 Schedule 4A Companies
Collaborating with other agencies to develop whole-of-government approaches.
Collaborative and ongoing process
Collate a national New Zealand data set on the health and wellbeing impacts of working through the COVID-19 lockdowns.
Collecting statistical information using cookies via Google Analytics
Collection by third parties
Collection in these circumstances is subject to enhanced levels of oversight and increased internal controls to ensure it is conducted appropriately.
Collection of personal information
Collection, storage and use
Combatting climate change with hybrid-electric jet planes
Combatting modern forms of slavery: Plan of action against forced labour, people trafficking and slavery [PDF 207KB]
Combatting online financial scams
Combines our labour market monitoring programme with the latest developments in the labour market to paint a summary of labour market trends up to the latest quarter.
Combining a proven reputation as a trusted and responsible global citizen with a nimble and responsive government system that gets things done.
Come to our monthly drop-in sessions online where you can ask your National Contact Points, MBIE, EURAXESS, University and CRI Research support staff and more all of your questions. The questions are designed to be informal and supportive. We will cover 1-2 set topics each month which will be advertised in advance on the MBIE website during the first part of each session. The remaining time is available for Q & A.
Commentary on the Taxation (R&D Tax Credits) Bill [PDF 851KB]
Commerce Amendment Act 2018
Commerce and Consumer Affairs
Commerce and Consumer Affairs portfolio: briefing for the incoming minister [PDF 538KB]
Commerce, Consumer and Business
Commercial organisations put up a variety of payloads for different purposes including science, remote sensing and technology demonstration and educational. Other commercial purposes which do not fit into these categories include:
Commercialisation Partner Network
Commission 111 Contact Code
Commission a paper on best practice for including trafficking victims in NRMs.
Commissioned case studies
Commitment to add new delivery points
Commitments relating to other frequency bands Spectrum in the frequency ranges 1730 -1740 and 1825 -1835 MHz is currently committed for possible use by a new Emergency Services network and is also being considered for use by KiwiRail for train signaling and control. If further work shows it is not req uired for emergency services and/or rail the government will transfer this spectrum to the MSE . MBIE and MSE to review the status of this further work, with initial review to be undertaken within 6 months of the date of the MOU, and make a recommendation to the Minister if any further action is required. If this spectrum is required for Emergency Services and/or rail then MBIE will work with the MSE to determine whether sharing is possible between those functions and other use s. Spectrum in the 600 MHz b and is currently being considered for future use by cellular mobile/5G services. MBIE will work with the MSE to develop a model for spectrum allocation or licensing in the band , noting that the future use of this band has yet to be confirmed.
Common themes from these conversations include the challenges startups face with getting money, finding talented people, connecting with others, and being fair and inclusive.
Communications 42 Following Cabinet approval of the consultation document and finalisation of the Bill by PCO, officials will send the Bill, consultation document, and response form to all consultation participants. I will also make a public announcement to confirm that this action in the Q3 Action Plan has been met. Proactive Release 43 I intend to proactively release this Cabinet paper (subject to redactions in line with the Official Information Act 1982). Recommendations The Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety recommends that the Committee: 1.note that in May 2024 [CAB-24-MIN-0181] Cabinet noted the intent to release an exposure draft of the Bill for targeted consultation to test a range of policy options with those who will be affected by the reform, and to report back to Cabinet in August seeking agreement to the content of the consultation document; 2.note that, in addition to amending existing Cabinet decisions, Cabinet agreed that the Bill should include a pro-rata approach for providing the minimum 10-day sick leave entitlement and that, as authorised by Cabinet, the Minister for I N C O N F I D E N C E 7 3u22ohzj22 2024-09-25 17:37:38 Free and frank opinions I N C O N F I D E N C E Workplace Relations and Safety has made decisions on the detail of the approach that will be included in the consultation document; 3.note that the purpose of the consultation document is to seek feedback on the technical and policy details of the proposals in the Bill and on alternative policy options; 4.note that if, following consultation, Cabinet agrees to further work on key areas of the Bill, then additional time for further policy development and legislative drafting will be required, and that the timing of introduction would depend on the number and significance of the changes and whether further testing is required; 5. 6.agree to the content of the attached consultation document for release alongside the exposure draft of the Bill in September 2024, and that officials may make minor and editorial changes before it is released for targeted consultation; 7.note that the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety will report back to Cabinet in December 2024 on feedback themes and the proposed policy direction. Authorised for lodgement Hon Brooke van Velden Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety I N C O N F I D E N C E 8 3u22ohzj22 2024-09-25 17:37:38 Confidential advice to Government Appendix Two: Summary of key proposals and alternative options included in the consult ation document (Blue represents areas where this Government took decisions in May 2024 on changes to previous Cabinet policy decisions) Annual Leave (AL) Sick, Bereavement and Family Violence leave Key areas of change Key proposals in the Bill Provision of entitlement A weeks-based accrual system whereby entitlement accrues continuously during employment. Taking AL -rights and Adjustments to align rights and obligations related to taking AL with weeks-based obligations accrual. Determining use of AL A new methodology for determining use of AL entitlement that removes the requirement for agreement between parties about what a 'working week' means for an employee. It provides a formula that is applicable to all working arrangements and does not require the application of judgement. Payments Pay-as-you-go (PAYG) (AL paid with regular pay) Annual C/osedowns Provision of sick leave entitlement >AL payment method: A new 'greater of three' calculation methodology: Ordinary Weekly Leave Pay, Quarterly Average Leave Pay (QALP), Annual Average Leave Pay (AALP). >Gross earnings: New expanded definition to clarify which payment types are included. >One payment calculation for AL when employment ends (because of shift to accrual). >AL payment rules for employees who have had a period of parental or volunteers leave: rather than AL pay being based only on AALP, payments based on the normal method. New objective criteria for determining eligibility for using PAYG along with a clear framework for reviewing its use during employment. New provision s related to establishing and having annual closedow ns to provide greater clarity and transparency. >A pro-rata approach for providing the minimum 10-day sick leave entitlement which retains a five-day 'floor' for all eligible employees with a four-tier entitlement scale based on days of work per week. >In the first year of employment entitlement accumulates over the first six months. 3u22ohzj22 2024-09-26 13:55:31 Summa ry of alternative options include d in the consultation document Design an hours-based accrual model for all or some employees (and shifts in the end-to-end system to support this). >Provide the ability to cash up more than one week of AL 'in' each year. >Extend the minimum notice period before an employee can be required to take AL. >Alternative options for specific groups of employees including those who: > work guaranteed and additional hours (option: instead of guaranteed hours use an average). > have agreed hours of work that differ between weeks (option: use specific instead of average weeks). >have no agreed hours (options: use an average of hours worked over 52 weeks rather than a quarter and provide ability to calculate averages at fixed points in time rather than each time leave is taken). >Provide the ability for employers and employees to agree to a different method than the one prescribed for determining how an employee's AL entitlement will be provided and its use. >Payment method: the current 'greater of two' calculatio n or a shift to a single calculation (similar to FBAPS). >Timing of calculations: calculate QALP and AALP at fixed points in time (once a quarter, or every six months) rather than every time leave is taken. >Gross earnings: clarify the status quo or narrow the definition. >Cash value of board and lodgings: a modernised rule for including this in leave payments. >AL payment rules for employees who have had a period of parental or volunteers leave: retain current payment rule or adjust rules so that AL does not accrue during these periods, but AL payment at the full rate. >Increase flexibility around using PAYG so it can be used for more employees or remove ability to use PAYG but ensure rules for calculating pay are simple and practical. >Remove requirement to review use of PAYG during employment, so it could be used indefinitely once agreed. >Do not introduce a requirement to establish a closedown window before an annual closedown takes place. >Provide the ability for employers to have more than one annual closedown period per year. > Pro-rate the full ten-day sick leave entitlement. > Adjust the scaling approach so there are more or fewer tiers. >Provide a mechanism to account for days an employee works in addition to guaranteed hours of work. >Design a weeks or hours-based sick leave accrual model for all or some employees (and shifts in the end-to-end system to support this). Sick, Bereave ment and Family Violence leave Public and Alternative holidays Changes to leave-re lated provisions in other legislation Key areas of change Key proposals in the Bill Summary of alternative options included in the consultation document Bereavement leave entitlement Eligibility framework Criteria for using entitlements Payments Entitlement criteria Transferring whole public holidays Payments >Expanded list of family members on whose death an employee may take three, days bereavement leave. >Clarificat ion that an employee may take bereavement leave at any time following the bereavement. Employees with agreed hours have access to entitlements from the first day of employment (rather than waiting six months) and other employees after three months if a test is met. >New criteria for days on which leave entitlement may be used: Otherwise Working Day (OWD) concept replaced with criteria similar but distinct from 'OWD' test for public holiday entitlements. >Reframed method for using and paying sick and family violence leave while receiving accident compensation. >Ability to take part days of leave proportionate to the number of hours that wou Id have been worked on the day. > A new definition of Relevant Daily Pay (RDP) for leave payments and removal of Average Daily Pay (ADP): RDP = base rate for wages/salary, fixed allowances, an average hourly rate of productivity or incentive based payments. New criteria for identifying 'Otherwise Working Days' (OWD) for determining whether public holiday entitlements apply, including an objective test '50% test' for employees who do not have agreed days of work. Clarifications to the conditions and processes for agreeing to transfer a public holiday to another OWD (must be by employee request and OWD's identified when transfer is agreed). > A new definition of Relevant Daily Pay (RDP) for leave payments (refer to sick, bereavement and family violence leave payments above). > A new payment calculation for working on a public holiday: 1.5 times pay for hours actually worked plus RDP for any agreed hours not worked. Provision of a pay A new legal requirement to provide a pay statement in each pay period to provide greater statement transpa rency about leave and pay for employees. Leave entitlements after A flexible approach enabling the treatment of leave entitlements to be negotiated by the a sale or transfer incoming and outgoing employers rather than requiring AL to be paid out. Parental leave payment Replacement of the Holidays Act 'Ordinary Weekly Pay' part of the calculation with a method four-week average of gross weekly earnings. >Do not expand access to three days bereavement leave or reduce extent of expansion. >Create a specific list of people on whose death an employee may take one day bereavement leave. >Introduce a time limit for when bereavement leave entitlement expires. >Retain six-month waiting period for all employees who meet eligibility criteria. >Adjust eligibility criteria to be more or less restrictive. >Simplify by removing any eligibility criteria -all employees eligible from day one or after six months. >Accumulation profile -shorter than six months or remove staggering to simplify. Refer to OWD below. >Use a single calculation but use base only or base pay plus a loading. > A greater of two calculations methodology (RDP or ADP). > A higher (or lower) threshold than 50% of corresponding calendar days worked for a day to be an OWD. > A longer or shorter reference period for the 50% test (e.g., one, six or 12 months). Do not introduce a requirement for employers to provide a pay statement. >Remove uncertainty by clarifying the status quo. >Creating legislative structures to require employers to give transferring employees a choice about what happens to their leave balances. 3u22ohzj22 2024-09-26 13:55:31 MBIE112"9
Communications Portfolio: briefing for the incoming minister [PDF 1MB]
Communications and Broadband
Communications markets regulatory system
Communications, Design and Ministerial Services
Communications, Infrastructure and Trade
Communities Strategy 2022
Communities should have an active role in the management of tourism in their region and mana whenua have an essential role in Destination Management as Treaty partners. Common challenges communities want solved are noise, over-crowding, damage to the natural environment and a lack of cultural context for visitors.
Communities should have an active role in the management of tourism in their region.
Community Organisation Refugee Sponsorship Category Evaluation
Community Organisation Refugee Sponsorship Category Pilot: Process evaluation
Community Renewable Energy Fund
Community languages providers by location
Community leaders (church, sports groups and extended families) in these different groups can be strong advocates in promoting services through word of mouth and encouraging participation by those in their wider network. This endorsement increases trust in services and programmes and increases the likelihood of participation.
Community perceptions of migrants and immigration 2019 [PDF 1.8MB]
Community perceptions of migrants and immigration 2021 [PDF 3.6MB]
Companies Act 1993 modernisation: further policy decisions
Companies Act 1993 modernisation: further policy decisions [PDF 551KB]
Companies Office (CO) levy A CO levy of $15 .00 is proposed, to be paid once annually by users of entity registers with their incorporation (registration) or annual return fee. A proposed new CO levy would recover the shared costs (costs of operating the registry system that are not specific to any one register) that are currently allocated across existing Companies Office fees. It is proposed that the CO levy will be paid annually by users of the entity registers.11 For users who incorporate a new entity on one of these registers, the levy will be charged alongside the incorporation or registration fee. The levy will be charged in following years alongside the fee for filing an annual return. By charging users of the entity registers alongside these fees, most Companies Office users will contribute $15 .00 once a year to funding shared services.
Companies Office Fees and Levies Review
Companies The Companies register is the most comprehensive and searched register administered by the Companies Office. It provides the infrastructure for registered companies and the Registrar of Companies to meet the requirements of the Companies Act. Table 9 on the next page shows the proposed adjustments to current fees paid by companies on the register.
Compass Communications Ltd
Compelling visitor experiences
Competition market study into supermarkets
Competition regulation and policy
Competition regulatory system
Competition study into personal banking services
Competition system charter
Competitive and dynamic markets are critical to economic productivity and the welfare of New Zealanders.
Competitive business settings
Complaint self-assessment
Complaints about breaches of the Human Rights Act, including discrimination, racial and sexual harassment and conversion practices
Complaints about telecommunication service providers
Complaints and disputes about retirement villages
Complaints should be emailed to the Board Appointments and Governance team:
Complaints will be managed in accordance with the following principles:
Complete our feedback form
Complete research programme into how best to deliver information to migrant workers and their employers.
Complete the Confidentiality Deed
Complete the TDPF application form:
Completed in December 2021, this report covers screen sector firms and employment trends from 2000 to 2020.
Completing and submitting all necessary documentation to support a flexible working arrangement.
Compliance information regarding the performance of this policy will be provided to the relevant business group and the Compliance Centre of Excellence on a quarterly basis.
Compliance reporting and information regarding the performance of this policy will be provided to the relevant business group and the Enterprise Risk and Compliance branch on a quarterly basis.
Comply with this policy and associated procedures applicable to their role
Complying with this and all other relevant MBIE policies.
Components of a Destination Management plan
Comprehensive and Progressive Trans-Pacific Partnership (2018)
Comprehensive and accurate data and insights are an essential component of all industry decision-making processes, whether by central and local government, businesses, entrepreneurs and investors, tangata whenua, communities and interest groups, the media, researchers and academics, and others.
Comprehensive economic data on the screen sector builds and strengthens our understanding of the economic contribution of the sector to New Zealand, and plays a valuable role informing policymakers and the sector.
Computer Engineering or Computer Systems Engineering; or
Computer networks and cloud computing
Computers can process large quantities of data quickly, much faster than our staff can manually. We may use algorithms to keep up with large application numbers so our staff can deal with more complex work and respond to the public quicker. For example, the Immigration New Zealand Advance Passenger Processing (APP) which performs validation matching and screens for risks at the border.
Conceptually this operation extracts the oils from leaves and flowers to make essential oils for food, household, cosmetics, and health sectors.
Concerns of financial hardship
Conditions to apply to licence or permit
Conduct of financial institutions regime
Conferences, school events, university events
Confidential advice to Government
Confidential advice to Government I N C O N F I D E N C E 7 I N C O N F I D E N C E receives Royal assent. Payroll providers MBIE consulted confirmed that these changes can be implemented independently from the other changes in the Bill and would not require a major system change . 30 I propose that the consequential amendment to the PLEPA to replace the Holidays Act OWP calculation comes into force from the start of the financial year (1 July) following the date on which the Bill receives Royal assent and that it applies to parental leave applications re ceived on or after that date. I plan to release an exposure draft for targeted consultation 31 I plan to release an exposure draft of the Bill with an accompanying consultation document in September 2024. The exposure draft would largely reflect the prev ious Government’s decisions, with the amendments proposed above (refer paragraphs 20 – 23 above ) to improve workability in areas where officials can progress policy and drafting work quickly. I expect to bring a separate Cabinet paper seeking agreement to release the consultation document in August 2024 . 32 Releasing an exposure draft of the Bill would enable technical and workability issues to be surfaced , stakeholder concerns with policy decisions to be identified and for changes to be made before the Bill is introduced . Waiting for Select Committee to gain feedback increases the risk of further delay s to delivery if significant drafting changes are needed. 33 I propose that the exposure draft is a near-complete version of the Bil l although t here may be some areas (such as transitional provisions which are dependent on other areas of the Bill) where drafting is not able to be completed by September 2024. Officials will work with Parliamentary Counsel Office (PCO) to prioritise drafting resource on the core provisions of the Bill to ensure that feedback can be sought on those areas. Consultation 34 Feedback provided by payroll providers and practitioners during MBIE’s 2021 -2022 policy design process has helped to inform the proposals included in this paper. MBIE has also continued to engage with nominated representatives of Business New Zealand and the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions to seek their perspectives. They have indicated that they are supportive of the work undertaken to simplify the Taskforce’s recommendati ons. 35 The following Public and non-Public Service departments and agencies were consulted on this paper: Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet (Policy Advisory Group), the Treasury, Public Service Commission, IR, Office of the Privacy Commissioner, MoE, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Justice, Ministry of Social Development, Ministry for Culture and Heritage, D epartment of Internal Affairs, Ministry of Defence, Ministry for Women, Ministry of Disabled People, Te Puni Kōkiri , Te Arawhiti, Ministry fo r Pacific Peoples, Oranga Tamariki, Ministry for Ethnic Communities, PCO , New Zealand Police and the New Zealand Defence Force. 36 Health New Zealand - Te Whatu Ora (Health NZ) has been consulted on the paper due to the size and complexity of the workforce it employs and funds , and the potentially significant costs to government of implementing the changes in the 6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:12:15 I N C O N F I D E N C E
Confidential advice to Government, Free and frank opinions
Confidentiality and information sharing
Confirmation of decisions regarding Callaghan Innovation
Conformance assessments check that goods, services, personnel and systems meet standards or comply with regulatory requirements.
Conformity Assessment Mutual Recognition Arrangements
Conformity assessment mutual recognition arrangements
Connecting Now (the current provider)
Connecting Now is a language service provider committed to enabling seamless communication across cultures.
Consider amending the Crimes Act 1961 to strengthen provisions for the criminalisation of trafficking in children.
Consider commissioning an assessment of the prevalence of forced marriage in New Zealand.
Considering the impact of their application on their team and on MBIE throughout the application process.
Consistency or reproducibility
Consistent findings observed by different persons in different places with different samples strengthen the likelihood of an effect.
Construction & Urban Planning
Construction Sector Accord
Construction Skills Action Plan
Construction and demolition waste (which accounts for up to half of all wastes going to landfill) could be reduced at the initial design stages of building or used as input for new products. Modular construction, offsite prefabrication and adaptive reuse are emerging as approaches for resource-efficient buildings. Development of data and digital tools, such as material passports and material tracking systems, would enable more reuse and remanufacture of materials.
Consulation on the revised Terms of References
Consultation and summary of submissions
Consultation document: Insulation requirements in housing and other buildings
Consultation document: Options to address the safety risks of corded window coverings
Consultation is coordinated by MBIE, and supported, as appropriate, by the wider APO membership.
Consultation is led by MBIE and supported by ACC
Consultation is scheduled to close on 5 March 2023, 5pm.
Consultation methodology and feedback
Consultation on changes to the regime
Consultation on modern slavery and worker exploitation
Consultation on the Policy Statement on the Venture Capital Fund Act 2019
Consultation on the Review
Consultation on the Review occurred from mid-August to the end of September 2021. The MBIE Review team identified and targeted the following entities that were directly affected by the Act, but an open invitation was also placed on the MBIE website for any others to provide their direct interest:
Consultation opens on draft Tourism Environment Action Plan
Consultation paper: Draft Incorporated Societies Regulations 2023
Consultation paper: Proposed updates to ACC regulated payments for treatment
Consultation paper: Seeking proposals for additions to the list of occupational diseases under the Accident Compensation Act 2001
Consultation requests can be sent to
Consultation section on the MBIE website
Consultation with RSE workers
Consultation with the Minister for Auckland
Consultation, engagement and hui
Consultations between Police and Oranga Tamariki Specialist Child Interviewers Unit (SCIU) to strengthen techniques and skills when interviewing child victims, has not yet progressed.
Consultations, analysis and resources
Consultative planning informed by data and insights
Consumer Advocacy Council
Consumer Advocacy Council (2021 to 2024)
Consumer Information Standards (Origin of Food) Regulations 2021
Consumer Information Standards (Origin of Food) Regulations 2021 - Minute of Decision [PDF 185KB]
Consumer Information Standards (Origin of Food) Regulations 2021 [PDF 308KB]
Consumer Protection Website
Consumer Protection quarterly reports
Consumer Protection website
Consumer and Commercial Regulatory System Assessment
Consumer and Commercial charter
Consumer and commercial regulatory system
Consumer research and reports
Consumer summary discussion document: Ticket reselling in New Zealand
Consumers seeking refunds or credits should contact the travel agent or wholesaler they booked through. MBIE does not collect identifiable consumer information about individual bookings.
Contact CrimeStoppers on 0800 555 111 or complete an online Crimestoppers form to report a case anonymously.
Contact Immigration New Zealand on 0508 558 855 if you have questions about your immigration status and whether you can work in the sex industry on your visa.
Contact details and postal identifiers
Contact for telephone discussion (if required)
Contact person's designation: Managing Director
Contact person: Ben Fitzpatrick
Contact person: Dennis Welby
Contact person: Harry Clark
Contact person: Howard Ede
Contact person: Malcolm Shaw
Contact person: Nelson Siva
Contact person: Rob Alker
Contact person: Sharon Souproanuck
Contact the New Zealand Space Agency
Contact us for more information
Contact us if you have questions about applying for a permit or licence. Talking about your application with us means that we can make sure you are providing us with all necessary information. A discussion can also help us process your application more efficiently. We can help you transfer any sensitive information and ensure it is protected, subject to relevant legislative requirements.
Contact us to receive a copy of the launch facility licence application form.
Contact us to receive a copy of the launch licence application form.
Contact your territorial authority directly for more information about proposed local policies for Easter Sunday shop trading.
Contact's designation: Company Secretary and General Counsel
Contents ........................................................................................................................................ 2 How to have your say .................................................................................................................... 3 Glossary of terms .......................................................................................................................... 4 Forward ......................................................................................................................................... 6 1. Introduction .......................................................................................................................... 7 History of the Holidays Act ............................................................................................ 7 1.1 Overview of the current review .................................................................................... 8 1.2 Scope of the review ....................................................................................................... 8 1.3 2. Overview of the Holidays Act 2003 ..................................................................................... 10 3. Who is affected by the issues with the current Act? .......................................................... 12 All employers and employees are affected by non-compliance with the Act ............ 12 3.1 But it’s harder for some employers for different reasons .......................................... 12 3.2 And the effects can be worse for some employ ees .................................................... 13 3.3 The Labour Inspectorate has a significant role to play as the regulator, and is also an 3.4 important user of the Act ....................................................................................................... 14 4. What are the key issues with the Holidays Act 2003? ........................................................ 15 Some issues relate to all aspects of the Act ................................................................ 15 4.1 Annual holidays – determining entitlements and payments ...................................... 17 4.2 BAPS leave – determining entitlements and payments .............................................. 18 4.3 Other issues ................................................................................................................. 19 4.4 5. Ideas for change .................................................................................................................. 20 6. Next steps ............................................................................................................................ 22 Recap of questions ...................................................................................................................... 23 Annex 1: Terms of Reference…………………………………………………………………………………………………. 28 Annex 2: More detailed list of issues………………………………………………………………………………………31
Contents Safety Case Guidance 2 Public Safety 2 The importance of a Safety Case 2 Your safety duty 3 What is a Safety Case? 3
Context of the consultation
Continue the New Zealand Space Scholarship which supports internships for graduate students at prestigious international space research institutes.
Continuing to carry out their work in accordance with wellbeing, health and safety policies and guidelines.
Continuing to meet performance expectations and maintaining open communication with their people leader and team (unless privacy is a concern) for the duration of the arrangement.
Continuing to set clear expectations and maintain open communication throughout the duration of flexible working arrangements. Regularly reviewing flexible working arrangements to ensure they are still working effectively for the individual, the team, and MBIE.
Contract and Commercial Law Act 2017
Contract between the New Zealand Government and Rocket Lab - Cabinet paper (Sept 2016)
Contract between the New Zealand Government and Rocket Lab - EGI Minute (Sept 2016)
Contracting arrangements, or contracts for services, are a fundamental part of our labour market, and are used across nearly all sectors of the economy.
Contractor work in Aotearoa New Zealand
Contractors and service providers funded by, or working on behalf of MBIE to provide children's services, either have adopted a suitable child protection policy and regularly review their own child protection policy, or have adapted and applied the MBIE policy as appropriate.
Contractors doing screen production work can bargain collectively in their occupational groups and at the production/company level.
Contractors doing screen production work must have written contracts with mandatory terms about contract termination and protection from bullying, discrimination and harassment.
Contracts and policies relating to social media training [PDF 3MB]
Contracts of Insurance Act 2024
Contractual and financial disputes between domestic tertiary learners and education providers. Helping international students resolve complaints with their education provider.
Contribute to our short, medium and long-term development outcomes we seek in the Pacific region
Convention on the prohibition of military or any other hostile use of environmental modification techniques
Conventional promotional and awareness strategies such as utilizing church groups, Pacific-language radio shows, and Facebook are considered effective methods to reach the Pacific community.
Conversion of Inbound Tour Operator (ITO) loans to grants (up to $0.5 million per ITO)
Conversion of up to $0.5 million per ITO of the STAPP loans to grants. This is for ITOs that accepted and received STAPP loans in 2020. ITOs promote and sell New Zealand travel packages to offshore buyers, such as wholesalers, travel agents, meeting planners, and event managers.
Coordination across the tourism system
Copyright material on this website is protected by copyright owned by the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment on behalf of the Crown.
Copyright of third parties
Copyright or trademark issues should be resolved between the parties concerned.
Copyright protection in New Zealand
Copyright protection overseas
Corin Walker Bain, Waitomo Caves, Waikato
Corporate and Digital Shared Services
Corporate and Digital Shared Services is headed by Deputy Secretary Richard Griffiths.
Corporate governance regulatory system
Correspondence between MBIE and State Services Commission about the inquiry
Cost Recovery Impact Statement to assess the proposed changes for the 2025-2028 levy round.
Cost centre and natural account (in number format, xxxx.xxxx) or a project code (in the number format xxxx.xx.xx.xxxx)
Cost reductions really are the key driver. But managing a complex environment with multiple users is also. It's also worth pointing out here as well that digital twins don't suddenly just appear. What happens is that there's a use case or a business case. And so, I want to make the point clear that what normally happens is that somebody looks at a range of data they have and they go wow, wait, if we can pull them together into something that's practical, and we can use in a better way, there's going to be a lot of potential. So it usually starts with that and it builds up over time. So it doesn't suddenly just magically appear.
Costs for subsiding telecommunications services supplied under TSOs are funded through the Telecommunications Development Levy. This levy is collected from the telecommunications industry.
Costs to government 22. Costs of PL payments : It is not possible to calculate an exact fiscal cost due to the number of variables (such as the pay and work arrangements of specific applicants) and unknowns (such as number of applicants in a given year). IR expects any changes in costs because of the proposal to be minimal however, and manageable within the existing appropriation. As discussed in paragraph 18
Councils can put in place local policies that allow shops within their area, or parts of it, to trade on Easter Sunday. Councils create local policies, and then notify MBIE.
Councils representing regions in New Zealand that do not have an RTO
Counsellor, Science and Innovation, China
Counsellor, Science and Innovation, Europe
Counsellor, Science and Innovation, USA and Canada
Countries have implemented a range of measures including bans, levies, taxes, minimum prices, requirements for information on products, procurement, grants and other fiscal incentives. There has also been growing attention and support for circular policy objectives, such as extended producer responsibility, repairability and reuse and recycling of materials.
Country of origin of food
Courses available within the Bachelor of Science at Auckland University of Technology:
Cover briefing asking Ministers to take the attached Cabinet paper to the Cabinet Economic Development Committee.
Cover letter to Doug Martin [PDF 358KB]
Coverage for contractors and the self-employed who lose work
Coverage for employees made redundant or laid off
Coverage for job losses due to redundancy, layoffs and health conditions and disabilities
Coverage for loss of work due to a health condition or disability
Coversheet to Fair Pay Agreements Regulatory Impact Statement 2023 [PDF 188KB]
Craft markets, farmers markets
Create a new Classification Unit and Levy Risk Group for home improvement stores; modernise the Classification Unit for professional sports and ballet; and create a new Classification Unit for those who do not employ participants.
Created by Ariki Creative, Te Ara Waihiko began in 2017 with Rangatahi focused workshops, resource development
Creating beauty from New Zealand: Supporting investment in the emerging natural or bio-based cosmetics platform
Creating more adaptive and resilient institutions
Creating safer places: addressing workplace violence in community-based care and support settings.
Creating strength from New Zealand: Supporting investment in the sports nutrition and weight management platform
Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 New Zealand License
Credit Contracts and Consumer Finance (Buy Now, Pay Later) Amendment Regulations 2023
Criminal Cases Review Commission
Criminal Disclosure Act 2008
Criminal Procedure Act 2011
Criminal Procedure Act 2011 and Criminal Procedure Rules 2012
Criminalisation of cartels 2018-19
Criteria to establish a causal relationship
Criteria to establish if the causal connection between the disorder and employment is sufficiently strong to enable automatic acceptance of a claim
Critical Issues in Space Law (LEGAL444 2021)
Critical materials, for example through improving product durability and domestic recycling of critical materials, such as plasterboard and those found in electronic devices.
Critical worker occupancy
Cross-government functions
Cross-subsidisation to cover motorcycle claims
Crown Entities we monitor
Crown Fibre Holdings (CFH) was formed as a Crown-owned company to manage the Government's investment in UFB infrastructure. It completed its initial task of selecting partners to participate in the UFB initiative in 2011. The telecommunications industry has recently sought clarification of CFH's role during the building of the UFB network and setting of network prices.
Crown Infrastructure Partners Limited
Crown Infrastructure Partners is managing the contractual arrangements for RBI2. For more information, please visit:
Crown Infrastructure Partners is managing the contractual arrangements for the MBSF.
Crown Infrastructure Partners' website
Crown Law Media Protocols for Prosecutors
Crown Minerals Act Amendment Bill introduced
Crown Minerals Act regime
Crown Research Institute Toolkit
Crown Research Institutes
Crown Research Institutes (CRIs) are Crown-owned companies that carry out scientific research for the benefit of New Zealand.
Crown Research institutes
Crown entities and statutory boards
Crown entities we monitor
Crown entity partners include:
Crown entity partners play an integral delivery role across these roles. The Labour Science and Enterprise Group facilitates and advises on the settings they need to succeed.
Currency of your invoices
Current and historical minimum wage rates
Current and upcoming funding and investments:
Current building rules, ways to comply and guidance
Current contract expiring
Current endorsed qualifications
Current functions include free mobile and international calling, two-way calling between Speech-to-Speech service users, and the ability to use both Zoom and Microsoft Teams when booking remote sessions on the Video Interpreting Service.
Current funding and investment opportunities
Current initiatives and resources
Current postal operators in New Zealand, their postal identifiers and contact details.
Current work underway to deliver a regenerative tourism model is aimed at:
Currently funded Research Programmes
Currently funded Smart Ideas
Currently there are 2 TSO providers:
Customers of insolvent businesses
Customs plans to refresh people trafficking training to particularly target border operations and intelligence staff.
Cutting red tape at the start of employment
Cycle Tourism Insights Report
Cycle tourism is a low carbon activity that can help connect visitors to local communities, experience local food, beverage and artisanal products, and create a direct link with the local culture and heritage.
Cycle trail users brought an estimated direct economic contribution to regions of more than $950 million.
Cycle trails good for health, economy
Cyclone Gabrielle and Cyclone Tam highlighted the vulnerability of electricity infrastructure to severe weather events like storms and floods. During Cyclone Gabrielle alone, trees outside the Growth Limit Zone (GLZ - a designated area around power lines which trees are not allowed to grow into) caused power outages that left 68,000 households without heating, lighting, internet and access to essential appliances.
DECISION: Date of decision and sentence outcome
DIA to continue rollout of trafficking training for staff processing CBD applications.
DISTRICT COURT AT {insert court ) ON: (insert date of sentencing) JUDGE: Insert name of sentencing Judge COUNSEL: PROSECUTION : Insert name DEFENDANT: Insert name PLEA: Guilty/Not -guilty
DM brings together different stakeholders to achieve the common goal of developing a well-managed, sustainable visitor destination. It is an ongoing process that requires destinations to plan for the future and considers the social, economic, cultural and environmental risks and opportunities.
DM involves collaboration across the multiple stakeholders that make up the ecosystem of a destination.
DM plans should focus on activation and critically determine key areas that are realistic and achievable.
DOIA-REQ-0007615 - OIA relating to the Tenancy services helplines [PDF 322KB]
Daily fuel importer margin series [PDF 121KB]
Daily importer margin charts
Daily updates of statistics covering managed isolation and quarantine occupancy, projected occupancy over the next 14 days, total returnees to New Zealand, incident reports and Ministry of Health testing data.
Daily updates up to 14 November
Daiyu is a manager for a local florist. An economic downturn, combined with changing demographics in the area, have led her boss to call time on the business.
Daphne Luke Te Huarahi Tika Trust
Data Insights & Intelligence
Data Science Review Board
Data Strategy & Knowledge
Data and related resources on the economic impact of COVID-19
Data collected may include:
Data from funding rounds that used the 2008 ANZSRC codes has been mapped to the latest 2020 ANZSRC codes using the translations supplied by the 2020 ANZSRC working group.
Data from the Business Events Research Programme, gathered via the Business Events Activity Survey and Business Event Delegate Survey.
Data from weekly monitoring of importer margins for regular petrol and automotive diesel
Data is a key priority in the New Zealand-Aotearoa Government Tourism Strategy.
Data is provided for provided for the period 1 July 2019 to 10 April 2025. The report is updated quarterly.
Data on the number of requests we have received in previous years and the timeliness of our responses are published annually by the
Data project requirements
Data science and analytics research
Data tables for coal production in New Zealand
Data tables for electricity production in New Zealand
Data tables for gas production in New Zealand
Data tables for oil production in New Zealand
Data tables for renewable energy resources in New Zealand
Data tables showing greenhouse gas emissions from New Zealand's energy sector
Data, information, and digital tools can help track and manage resources more efficiently, supporting the functioning of markets and transparency for consumers.
Data, research and analysis
Data-driven innovation, artificial intelligence, and government procurement were identified as future focus areas.
Dates are subject to change. We will notify all date changes by email. Join our mailing list to receive email updates.
Dates for the next funding round have not been finalised.
David Hudson, SGA Solutions
David Perks, GM Regional Development Destination and Attraction, WellingtonNZ
Dawn Aerospace - increasing NZ space flight
Dawn Aerospace New Zealand Limited
Dawn Aerospace has a vision of sustainable and scalable space transportation at every step, from getting things to space, moving them around and bringing them back to Earth.
Dawn Aerospace is a NZ registered company pushing the boundaries of space technology and engineering in green satellite propulsion, suborbital launch vehicles and novel orbital launch systems. Read more about their innovation successes in our guest article written by Kiwi Co-founder, James Powell.
Dawn Aerospace is a New Zealand aerospace company with subsidiaries in the United States and the Netherlands.
Dawn Aerospace take on summer interns and work in collaboration with a range of universities to support final year (Honours) and master's students. To find out more email
De-esclation training for MBIE staff [PDF 1.6MB]
Dear Minister, It is with pleasure that I submit these recommendations for changes to the Holidays Act 2003 to you on behalf of the Holidays Act Taskforce. You asked us to have regard to a range of criteria in our review and in particular to attempt to reach c onsensus in our recommendations. I am pleased to say that thanks to the hard work of the Taskforce members and their genuine desire to arrive at solutions that meet the needs of all parties, we have managed to do so. The recommendations in this report are endorsed by all Taskforce members. Throughout the review the Taskforce has been guided by some key principles which have informed our discussions and the decision -making process we have followed. These principles are:  Certainty - the recommendations con tained in this report will provide the certainty that employers and employees require. Employers will know what they need to do to meet their obligations under the Act and employees will know what their entitlements are and when they have or have not recei ved them.  Transparency – the Taskforce’s proposals will ensure that employees are fully informed about their leave entitlements so they can see how their entitlements have been delivered and how any leave payments have been calculated .  Practicality – the Taskforce has been focu sed on ensuring that the proposals it develops can work in the real world. Th roughout the review the Taskforce has tested proposals with anonymised payroll data and with multiple employer and employee scenarios to check that they wi ll be implementable in the many and varied businesses across New Zealand. The proposals in this report will ensure tha t Government, unions, employers and, most importantly , employees, can have confidence that in the millions of instances each year when an employee requests and is granted leave by their employer, their leave bala nce and payment for that leave can and will be correctly calculated. The proposals meet the objectives from the terms of reference, and deliver the much needed clarity around holiday s, and other leave entitlements and pay , that employers and employees have sought for many years. I would like to take this opportunity to thank all those who have participated in the review and who have shared their views throughout the process. I would also like to express my appreciation to the Taskforce’s Secretariat for the work they did to support the Taskforce. I commend these proposals to you and look forward to the Government’s response.
Decarbonising process heat
December 2013 Pike River Implementation Final Update
December 2024 Update on Horizon Europe Partnerships
Deciding what form of dispute resolution process is needed
Decisions by Ministers are documented in Cabinet papers. We release these papers and their minutes.
Decisions on eligibility for remedies for personal grievances [PDF 273KB]
Deed of Amendment to the Deed of Understanding between The Sovereign in right of New Zealand acting by and through the Minister for the Digital Economy and Communications and New Zealand Post Limited (2022) [PDF 282KB]
Deed of Amendment to the Deed of Understanding between The Sovereign in right of New Zealand acting by and through the Minister of Broadcasting, Communications and Digital Media and New Zealand Post Limited (2018) [PDF 209KB]
Deed of variation: Chorus Limited and Chorus New Zealand [PDF 874KB]
Deep space communications
Define terms of reference for leadership group and plan development
Defining standards and conformance
Defining the destination is important when multiple stakeholders with various perspectives are involved. In addition, it fosters a pragmatic approach that can ensure progress and success.
Definition of a just transition for the Future of Work Tripartite Forum [PDF 129KB]
Definitions and classifications
Delivering a modern immigration system through the Our Future Services programme [PDF 1.7MB]
Delivering improvements to the Holidays Act is a priority for the Government.
Delivering services to people and business
Delivery of digital skills training and support focused on enabling small-medium tourism businesses to benefit from digitising their business.
Dennis Robert Welby t/a Jock's post
Department of Conservation
Department of Conservation (DOC)
Department of Conservation concessions waiver
Department of Conservation waiver
Department of Conservation: developing a framework for managing visitor risk from natural hazards in the conservation estate and online guidance around volcanic risk in Tongariro National Park.
Department of Corrections
Department of Internal Affairs
Department of Internal Affairs: will be in future working collaboratively with other agencies regarding future access to Whakaari/White Island
Department of Internal Affairs;
Department of Mechanical Engineering.
Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
Depending on the design of the system, MBIE may perform all of these functions in a given system, but usually there are a number of agencies involved which deliver different aspects.
Deploying tools such as checklists or other education to help inform staff and managers of their relevant obligations
Deployment under MBSF is expected to increase geographic mobile coverage by 20-30%, up from 50%.
Deputy Secretaries (Dep Secs)
Description of Activities 5
Description of goods/services
Design a satellite mission competition
Design and/or manufacture of space equipment and subsystems
Designating banking under the Customer and Product Data Bill
Designating banking under the Customer and Product Data Bill [PDF 175KB]
Despite this decline, at 48,167, new approvals remained just over 50% higher than they were in 2012/13.
Destination Management (DM) is a key focus of the strategy and will contribute to the following strategy goals:
Destination Management (DM) requires a holistic and integrated approach with three interdependent components:
Destination Management Guidelines
Destination Management Guidelines 2020
Destination Management Plans
Destination Management and planning is the mechanism by which New Zealanders can ensure that tourism in their region reflects their wishes and they have an agreed way to maximise the benefits that tourism brings whilst managing any negative impacts. It helps give greater certainty to the private sector that enables long term investment as well as confidence to the public sector about the facilities and services they need to provide.
Destination Management and why it's important
Destination Management brings together different stakeholders to achieve the common goal of developing a well-managed, sustainable visitor destination. It is an ongoing process that requires destinations to plan for the future and considers the social, economic, cultural and environmental risks and opportunities.
Destination Management brings together different stakeholders to achieve the common goal of developing a well-managed, sustainable visitor destination. It is an ongoing process that requires destinations to plan for their future and considers the social, economic, cultural and environmental risks and opportunities.
Destination Management planning can apply to a macro-area, region, district or specific location. All of these layers are relevant in the context of the destination and stakeholder needs.
Destination Management planning needs to be cognisant of national and regional planning frameworks to reduce the potential for conflicting objectives and unfulfilled goals. Destinations also have a role in influencing the focus of these frameworks.
Destination Management requires a holistic and integrated approach.
Destination Management requires data, research and insights to inform decision making and measure success. This includes understanding your visitors well, how your destination delivers on visitor needs and expectations, as well as measuring how your community feels about visitors and the tourism sector.
Destination Queenstown Events
Destination brand building and improving the visitor experience
Destination management and planning
Destinations focus on attracting both domestic and international visitors, including general holiday visitors, and visitors who may visit family and friends, or be attracted for an event, conference or study opportunity. They target different markets and segments through a range of promotional activities to realise the value for their destination from tourism, given their goals/ aspirations and the types of experiences that appeal to their selected markets.
Detail on making a submission, how we use the information you share with us, and how we may release information
Detailed development and assessment of options to deliver on the recommendations accepted by the Government at Stage 1
Detailed policy design work was completed
Detailed second-tier design parameters for an income threshold.
Details around establishing PROs
Details of the bi yearly ANZSRC review
Details the final changes to the MBIE Intelligence Re-alignment.
Details the final decision to the changes and implementation approach required as a result of the Government's decision to cease funding to, and disestablish, the Consumer Advocacy Council.
Details the final decisions across the Business and Consumer re-alignment.
Develop a life-course-derived approach to help reduce persistent disadvantage in the labour market.
Develop a new Civil Aviation Rule for experimental or developmental aircraft and systems operations to allow rapid iteration and testing of advanced aviation vehicles and technologies.
Develop a sustainable funding model for Regional Development investments including the operation of Crown Regional Holdings Limited.
Develop education and public engagement initiatives to maximise the inspiration value of a national space mission.
Develop tools to support the provision of in-work-training, and improve investment in training-related active labour market programmes. (MBIE/MSD)
Developing a Destination Management plan
Developing a Safety Case 5
Developing a Safety Case Planning for the safety case Applicants should ensure that the safety case is presented as a robust argument (not as a summary of the safety management system). The safety case must: ȓ be owned by the leadership;
Developing a new dispute resolution scheme
Developing algorithms which predict human behaviour or automate decision-making impacting humans e.g. Artificial intelligence
Developing the Fair Pay Agreements policy and background information
Development and piloting of new training on child victim interviewing.
Development of Financial Market Conduct Act regulations
Development of a National Referral Mechanism (NRM) is being considered by Ministers. This will be a significant project with benefits for victim identification, support and the connection between government and non-government organisations.
Development of initial regulations
Development of the Financial Markets Conduct Act
Development of the Gene Technology Bill
Diagram of Proposed RSE system [PDF 201KB]
Diagram: The Work Health and Safety Regulatory System
Differences between the previous and new versions (also on Aria):
Different parts of our Ministry also have social media accounts that provide information about specific subject areas. Follow us for information and updates.
Different types of flexible working
Digital Boost training videos support small businesses to learn and adopt digital ways of working. There are a range of videos, from industry specific to real world stories from small businesses across Aotearoa, sharing their digital experience.
Digital Compliance for Low-Risk Plumbing and Drainlaying Work Pilot - Evaluation Findings
Digital Economy and Communications
Digital Solutions Delivery
Digital Strategy for Aotearoa
Digital Technologies Industry Transformation Plan
Digital Technologies Industry Transformation Plan (web version)
Digital Twins: Demonstration workshop report [DOCX 11MB]
Digital Twins: Demonstration workshop report [PDF 1.7MB]
Digital connectivity programmes
Digital technologies, digital twins
Digital technologies, digital twins and the circular and bioeconomy
Digital technologies: Digital twins and the circular and bioeconomy [DOCX 5.8MB]
Digital technologies: Digital twins and the circular and bioeconomy [PDF 1.3MB]
Digital twins are not yet being developed in a way to realise their full potential in New Zealand. A lack of data literacy is reducing the effective exchange and use of data. Limits in collaboration across industry and data standardisation mean digital twins are being developed without optimal interoperability.
Digital twins have important potential to support circular or sustainability objectives. They can help track materials in the value chain, facilitate predictive maintenance of machines, and fill gaps in information about product composition and availability to enable markets to function well for product reuse or recycling.
Digital twins in healthcare: a collaboration between New Zealand and Europe
Director, Edgar Diabetes and Obesity Research Centre and Head of Department (Medicine), University of Otago
Directors and senior management of BNPL lenders will be required to be certified by the Commerce Commission to be fit and proper persons for their respective positions.
Directors and senior management will be subject to due diligence duties.
Directors: Jignasha Patel, Nagaja Tharanginee Sanatkumar, John Gilbert Sproat, Rodger John Finlay (Chair), Carol Anne Campbell, Richie James Smith
Directors: Nelson Siva, Peter Beavis, Michael Smith, John McMahon
Directory of Official Information
Disagreement with an assessment or decision about your tax or child support
Disclaimer This document is not intended to be read as prescriptive requirements for the production of a safety case. This document is a guideline only and should not be used as a substitute for legislation or independent expert advice. Where this document is inconsistent with the Act and/or relevant Outer Space or High- altitude regulations, the Act and those regulations prevail. There may be factors taken into account in any application process, transaction or decision that are not covered by these guidelines. Adherence to these guidelines does not guarantee a particular outcome. The New Zealand Space Agency is not responsible for the results of any action taken on the basis of the information in this document, or for any errors or omissions. The New Zealand Space Agency may vary this document at any time without notice. Photo on inside front cover: “River Crossing” by Mark Gee Photo on inside back cover: “St Clair’s Milky Way” by David Willing MBIE 3960
Disclose The Disclose register was established by the Financial Markets Conduct Act 2013 (FMC Act) and provides for the registration and ongoing reporting obligations relating to offers of financial products and managed investment schemes. Its functions relate to managed investment schemes, other investment offers and financial statement filing. All fees are proposed to increase, reflecting planned investment in the Disclose register over the next two years to upgrade this register and reduced forecast volumes. The current fees were set in 2014 and were based on the estimated cost and volumes over a seven - year period, which included one -off volumes of schemes being re -registered. Though the cost of the register has remained relatively stable, current annual volum es have declined which has resulted in an increased unit cost. The proposed fees are based on the unit cost for each service which has been calculated from the average time it takes staff to complete the various services within the register. The unit costs in Table 13 on the next page are then derived from the cost of service divided by the forecast volumes. The most significant proposed increase is for the lodgment of Product Disclosure Statements (PDS). This increase is due to the additional time now taken to process the requested updates to existing products on the register and various compliance obligations throughout the year. Description of service Current fee – $ (GST exclusive ) Reason for revoking Verification statement by post 8.89 Service no longer provided. Certified copy of finance statement 22.22 Service no longer provided. This fee was similarly revoked in 2017 for the Companies register. 30 Table 1 3: Proposed fees for Disclose register services $ (excluding GST) Disclose register Unit Cost Proposed fee Proposed levies Proposed total charge Current charge (fee) Change in charge % change Disclose: Managed fund offers Lodgement of product disclosure statement/limited disclosure statement (per fund) 717.36 720.00 - 720.00 521.74 198.26 38% Add new fund to existing managed fund offer 717.36 720.00 - 720.00 521.74 198.26 38% Annual confirmation to managed fund (per fund) 717.36 720.00 - 720.00 521.74 198.26 38% Disclose: Other financial products Lodgement of product disclosure statement/limited disclosure statement (per PDS) 3,749.91 3,750 .00 - 3,75 0.00 2,347.83 1,402.17 60% Add new PDS to existing offer for other financial product 3,749.91 3,750 .00 - 3,75 0.00 2,347.83 1,402.17 60% Annual confirmation other financial products (per PDS) 3,749.91 3,750 .00 - 3,75 0.00 2,347.83 1,402.17 60% Disclose: Managed investment schemes Register managed investment scheme 1,247.42 1,245 .00 - 1,245 .00 673.91 571.09 85% File scheme annual report 295.32 295.00 - 295.00 239.13 55.87 23% Disclose: overseas offers Offer under Asia region funds passport (per fund) 717.36 720.00 - 720.00 521.74 198.26 38%
Disclosure of Chief Executive expenses - Carolyn Tremain: 1 July 2019 to 30 June 2020
Disclosure of Chief Executive expenses: 1 January 2018 to 30 June 2018
Disclosure of Chief Executive expenses: 1 July 2017 to 31 December 2017
Disclosure of Chief Executive expenses: 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
Disclosure of information
Disclosure of origin requirements in the patents regime
Disclosure regulations and third-party fundraisers consultation
Disclosure regulations would require third-party fundraisers to disclose prescribed information about their fundraising activities when asking for donations.
Discount forecast tracking
Discourage frivolous and excessive litigation, and
Discuss If you agree to option 2 above: Agree that those eligible for sick leave after three months are entitled to six days at that time and then a further four days (i.e. the full entitlement) after six months and that those eligible after six months would receive their full entitlement of 10 days at that time (aligned with the current six month timeframe). Agree Discuss Note that the accumulation profile may need to change if further amendments are made to sick leave entitlements e.g. pro rata for part-time workers. Noted Part 1: Payment methodology consolidation There are several issues with the current payment methodology for FBAPS leave 3. Under the Holidays Act 2003 (the Act), payment for FBAPS leave is an employee’s relevant daily pay1 (RDP) but, if it is not possible or practicable to work out RDP or an employee’s daily pay varies in the pay period in question average daily pay2 (ADP) may be used instead. 4. During the issue identification phase of the 2018 Holidays Act Review , several issues and concerns with the RDP and ADP definitions were raised. These included that: • determining RDP relies on an employer’s judgement about whether an employee would have received commission or incentive and overtime payments on a specific day had they not been on leave and what the value of those would have been . • there are situations were either RDP or ADP could be used (for example where it is possible and practicable to determine RDP, but an employee’s daily pay varies within the pay period in which the holiday or leave falls) and in these cases employers are required to a make a judgement about which calculation to use each time leave is taken, creating high compliance costs. • employers can game the rules by paying the lower of the ADP/RDP when either could be used (employer gaming) .
Discussion Document Review of New Zealand Companies Office Fees and Levies (202 5)
Discussion Document: Review of the Engine Fuel Specifications Regulations 2011
Discussion document for public consultation on proposed fees and levies, and their amounts, administered by the New Zealand Companies Office.
Discussion document released for public consultation
Discussion document: Commerce Commission levy for the economic regulation of water services
Discussion document: Enhancing telecommunications regulatory and funding frameworks
Discussion document: Moving towards a financially sustainable mail service
Discussion document: NZ Income Insurance Scheme summary
Discussion document: Regulations for soliciting on behalf of charities
Discussion document: Review of New Zealand Companies Office Fees and Levies (2025)
Discussion document: Seeking feedback on the proposed additions to Schedule 2 of the Accident Compensation Act 2001
Discussion document: Ticket reselling in New Zealand
Discussion paper: Growth and Dynamics of the New Zealand Screen Industry
Diseases will be excluded if evidence of the causal connection between the disorder and employment is not sufficiently strong to allow a connection to work to be automatically accepted.
Displaying all upcoming events
Dispute resolution following natural disasters (2018)
Dispute resolution following natural disasters [PDF 1.1MB]
Dispute resolution in New Zealand
Dispute resolution practitioners
Dispute resolution processes
Dispute resolution refers to all processes that are used to address disputes. It includes all dispute resolution methods and approaches from early resolution through to formal tribunal or court processes.
Dispute resolution research and insights
Dispute resolution resources
Dispute resolution scheme
Disputes about decisions made by ACC
Disputes about energy, water and broadband shared property access
Disputes about vehicles purchased from registered traders
Disputes are damaging, expensive, and time consuming. They affect individuals, communities, organisations, government, and the economy. Preventing disputes, and resolving disputes earlier and more effectively, benefits Aotearoa New Zealand and the economy.
Disputes between consumers and banking service providers
Disputes between consumers and financial service providers
Disqualify people convicted of migrant exploitation and people trafficking from managing or directing a company.
Distance is sparking innovation at Otago University and the German Aerospace Centre (DLR), where researchers are collaborating across oceans to advance communications in space.
Distinguished Professor Margaret Brimble, University of Auckland
Diversity Data Dashboard - Science System Investment and Performance
Diversity In MBIE Science Investments
Diversity in Science Statement
Diversity in Science statement
Diversity in public service employment
Diversity is vital for our science system to realise its full potential.
Diversity is vital for our science system to realise its full potential. A focus on diversity ensures we capture the very best ideas and talent to support the highest quality research.
Diversity, Equity and Inclusion Plan
Do Something New, New Zealand ft. Madeline Sami and Jackie van Beek
Do you dream of going to space?
Do you dream of going to space? In 2021 Haritina Mogosanu applied to be an astronaut at the European Space Agency (ESA).
Do you have access to people with the skills and capability you need?
Do you want to build and assemble rockets or satellites?
Do you want to build rocket engine components, or work with machines like 3D printers or computer-controlled mills or lathes to make parts of rocket engines, or test rocket engines on the ground?
Do you want to design or build the avionics systems that guide, navigate and control rockets and spaceplanes and satellites?
Do you want to design or build the electrical systems that power rockets, spaceplanes and satellites?
Do you want to design rocket bodies or spaceplane structures, and analyse and design the way they will fly into space?
Do you want to design rocket engines or satellite thrusters, or analyse and improve engines/thrusters using computer systems or test facilities?
Do you want to study data from rocket or spaceplane launches/flights and analyse or design systems and software that make better, faster, or safer space rockets or spaceplanes?
Documentation issued for the funding opportunity will contain
Documentation relating to the freedom camping law reforms
Documents on the House of Representatives website
Documents relating to MBIE's use of security guards part 1 of 3 [PDF 9.4MB]
Documents relating to MBIE's use of security guards part 2 of 3 [PDF 9.1MB]
Documents relating to MBIE's use of security guards part 3 of 3 [PDF 4.2MB]
Documents relating to changes to eligibility to remedies for personal grievances
Documents relating to introducing an income threshold for unjustified dismissal personal grievances
Documents relating to pay deductions for partial strikes
Documents relating to providing greater certainty for contracting parties
Documents relating to the Act's development
Documents relating to the Tourism Recovery Package
Documents relating to the development of the Equal Pay Amendment Act
Documents released to SCC inquiry
Does not provide flexibility for employers to continue the common practice.  Employees who are offered and choose to transfer employment do not lose leave entitlements and do not have to wait to become entitled to time off work.
Does not provide the choice between payment and time that option four does as transfer of entitlement is part of the choice to transfer employment. 4. Legislative change that ov errides the Holidays Act provisions and requires employers to offer employees the choice to transfer all or part of thei r leave entitlements if they negotiate for the employee to be offered the choice to transfer employment and the employee chooses to do so. Requires a minor adjustment/clarification to the current Cabinet decision, but it would be difficult to draft a legislative amendment to achieve this (most aligned with taskforce recommendations) .  Legislation provides clarity, but would introduce greater complexity framework than option three. ×× As above.
Doing what we say we will do, when we say we will do it.
Domestic Tourism International Benchmarking Study [PDF 10MB]
Domestic Violence - Victim's Protection Act 2018
Domestic demand and investment alone will not be sufficient to support our space and advanced aviation sectors to double in size. Increasing international trade and investment in New Zealand companies will be critical for sector growth.
Domestic tourism was able to keep many businesses alive during the closure of the international borders and reminded New Zealanders about the importance of tourism to the economy, encouraging kiwis to explore and try new experiences. This reminder will continue to be valuable as we welcome international visitors back to New Zealand.
Donnell Alexander, New Zealand Food and Grocery Council
Download a copy of our standard terms of purchase:
Download full monitoring and reporting dashboards
Download guidance for local authorities:
Download the PDF version here:
Download the PDF version:
Download the Pacific Migrant Trends and Settlement Outcomes full report 2018.
Download the Sectors data base
Download the data used to produce the charts on this page.
Download the factsheet about the Screen Industry Workers Act below.
Download the full reports
Download the latest quarterly report
Download the latest spreadsheet showing our forecast discounts and actual discounts for petrol and diesel.
Download the maturity assessment tool
Download the most recent datasets and associated data dictionaries here:
Download the screen sector data
Dr Bruce Thorrold / Laura Kearney, DairyNZ
Dr Domigan is a Senior Lecturer at the Department of Chemical and Materials Engineering at the University of Auckland. She received both her BSc (Hons) (2008), and PhD in Biochemistry (2012) from the University of Canterbury and was a Post-doctoral Fellow in the Department of Biomedical Engineering at Tufts University (Massachusetts, USA).
Dr Maia Brewerton, Health New Zealand and Malaghan Institute of Medical Research
Dr Nikki Freed, Daisy Lab
Dr Paul Gardner, University of Otago
Dr Rachel Perret, Malaghan Institute of Medical Research
Dr Regina Eisert is our Germany Science and Innovation Coordinator. She is responsible for establishing and strengthening bilateral collaboration in a wide range of mutually beneficial research fields.
Dr Rod Badcock, Robinson Research Institute, Victoria University of Wellington
Dr Wedderburn is the Emeritus International Ambassador at AgResearch. Before this she was the Assistant Research Director responsible for international collaborations, adoption and practice change.
Draft Digital Technologies Industry Transformation Plan 2022-2032
Draft Long-term Insights Briefing on the future of business for Aotearoa New Zealand
Draft critical minerals list released for consultation
Drafting of legislation to implement the Taskforce recommendations and refinements began before the 2023 General Election but a Bill was not introduced.
Drafting, introduction and passage of Bill (if any)
Draws on local as well as international talent, and has strong connections with the global space economy.
Du Val statutory management
Due to Covid travel restrictions this partnership was established solely online without meeting in face-to-face situations, what were some of the challenges and opportunities you came across?
Due to the experimental nature of this product, it should be used with caution. While care and diligence have been used in developing the data for this product, we cannot warranty it is error-free and will not be liable for any loss or damage suffered by the use, directly or indirectly, of it.
Duplication of other data initiatives, most notably TDLG recommended initiatives identified in the roadmap in the strategic business plan
During 2 rounds of funding, 42 applications were awarded a total of $8,285,523 by the Regional Mid-sized Tourism Facilities Grant Fund.
During Round 1 and 2 of the fund 32 projects received funding.
During a screen share session, we are viewing your computer screen, so you should ensure that anything private or confidential is not visible on your screen
During his internship Axl will work with the Jet Propulsion Laboratory team that is using Delta Differential One-way Ranging technique to determine spacecraft position. This is directly applicable to the work he will be doing at the Warkworth Space Centre when it begins supporting deep space missions later this year.
During the 2021 -2022 policy design process MBIE’s stakeholder working group raised concerns about the extent and cost of the payroll system changes that would be needed to implement the calendar methodology, as payrol l systems would be required to access and store data about daily hours of work and leave. Payroll providers indicated that most payroll systems, particularly those used by small businesses, are currently only configured to store total hours for a pay perio d rather than a breakdown of daily hours of work and leave . For many businesses implementation would require integration of time and attendance and payroll systems. • Remove the ‘calendar day’ aspect of the methodologies for determining the hours an employe e would have worked on a day of AL and other leave types , and replace them with formulas that use an average of an employee’s hours of work (including paid and unpaid leave) across all days worked in the pay periods that started in the 13 weeks before the one in which the leave is taken.
During the policy review process, input on the RSE scheme was sought from RSE workers via a survey and in-person group consultation sessions. Input from a series of prior consultation sessions on the development of the Ola Manuia Pacific RSE Health and Wellbeing Framework was also used to support the recommendations of the policy review.
During the transition period, Crown Research Institutes will continue to deliver the science that is needed by their customers and New Zealand.
Duties, taxes and direct levies on motor fuels in New Zealand
E-commerce means online trading, that is, buying and selling goods and services over electronic networks. Although e-commerce refers to all electronic transactions over any electronic network, today we tend to think of it as transactions carried out on the internet.
ENSURING A SAFE, RESPONSIBLE AND SECURE SPACE INDUSTRY
ENZ ethical and sustainable work practices resources have been completed for directors and investors.
ENZ provides a suite of learning modules for employees and employers, which are publicly available, and regularly updated. The modules cover issues such as employment rights, pay and wages, hours of work and resolving problems (directed at either the employee or the employer).
ENZ-commissioned migrant exploitation research (led by Kantar Public) on migrant workers and employers of migrant workers was released in September 2022. The research results will inform how to best deliver information to migrant workers and their employers.
ERA , come into force two months after the date the Bill receives
ETSP scheme terms and conditions.
EU Funding & Tenders Portal
EU reporting and disclosure measures that will have implications for some products placed on the market in the EU, including for product compliance, recyclability, or recycled content requirements, labelling and eco-design requirements, and traceability and product data.
EURAXESS Australia and New Zealand
Each General Manager is required to develop a Compliance, Monitoring and Assurance Plan for their functional area to ensure robust consideration of information gathering requirements. They are also required to make regular reports to the MBIE Information Gathering Policy Owner.
Each PDF only contains one invoice.
Each department will explore a different topic, but all are future-focused think pieces that enhance awareness and spark public debate on long-term issues.
Each email only contains one PDF, and
Each high-altitude licence has been approved by the Minister for Space, on advice from officials.
Each member economy, through its MBIE representative on the APEC Policy Partnership for Science, Technology and Innovation (PPSTI), is invited to nominate 1 young scientist under the age of 40 to be considered for the 2023 ASPIRE Prize.
Each of the 15 RSLGs produced RWPs in 2022, refreshed them in 2023, and established LIRs.
Each quarter, a Quarterly Connectivity Update is published reporting on the progress of the government's broadband and mobile programmes.
Each report is available for download below.
Each year we will track progress of some key labour market indicators. These indicators will provide a temperature check on how the labour market is performing and may identify where further work is required. The indicators have been identified because they measure long-term trends and support ongoing monitoring. They are based on data sources currently available. New indicators may be added as robust data sources become available. These indicators should be considered alongside the monitoring dashboards for the 7 employment action plans. These dashboards include more detailed breakdowns of key labour market statistics for the groups of people they are focused on.
Each year, the Minister for Social Development and Employment reports to Cabinet on the progress being made under the Employment Strategy. These reports are at the end of this page.
Earlier in her career, Carolyn worked for Air New Zealand where she was head of the Human Resources and Organisational Change for the Air New Zealand Group.
Early access to KiwiSaver
Earth Materials (GEOL702)
Earth observation and Earth science (including airborne science)
Earth sciences, including climate and hazards resilience
Earthquake repairs to Canterbury homes
Earthquake-prone building and seismic risk management review
Earthquake-prone building systems feedback
Earthquakes and natural disasters
East Asia Science and Innovation Area Joint Research Program
East Asia Summit Energy Cooperation Taskforce
Easter Sunday continues to be a day of significance across New Zealand and some people would rather not work on this day.
Easter Trading Laws: Your rights and responsibilities
Economic Benefits of Code Compliant Non-Structural Elements in New Buildings.
Economic Context Briefing - November 2023 [PDF 857KB]
Economic Context [PDF 278KB]
Economic Development and Tourism
Economic Development: briefing for the incoming minister [PDF 364KB]
Economic Impact Analysis of the Development of a Rocket Launch Industry (June 2016)
Economic benefits of the screen industry
Economic growth is key to raising living standards, creating higher-paying jobs, and delivering the vital infrastructure and public services that New Zealanders want and deserve.
Economic impacts of colonisation
Economic regulation of goods or services
Economic regulation policy for water services
Economic trends in the screen sector
Economic trends in the screen sector: Firms & employment
Economic trends in the screen sector: Firms and employment
Economic trends in the screen sector: Firms and employment [PDF 1.6MB]
Education New Zealand is a Crown agent that focuses on growing the economic, social and cultural value New Zealand gains from international education. It works with the international education industry and across other governments to promote the quality of the New Zealand education system and the country's expertise in providing education and training products offshore.
Education, Development & Training
Effective Marketing and Promotion
Effective financial dispute resolution: Summary of discussion paper
Effective marketing can be used to manage the effects of visitors in the area by advocating for responsible visitor behaviour e.g.
Effectiveness of information disclosure regulation for airports
Efficient and easy to navigate regulatory regimes for advanced aviation and space will position New Zealand as a world-leading location for development, testing, launch and flight operations.
Electrical Workers Registration Board
Electrical and Electronic Engineering
Electricial Workers Registration Board
Electricity (Safety) Regulations 2010
Electricity Demand and Generation Scenarios
Electricity cost and price monitoring
Electricity industry regulatory framework
Electricity operators in New Zealand
Electrifying Great Rides: application form [DOCX 177KB]
Electrifying the Great Rides
Electronic Travel Authority information [PDF 886KB]
Electronic Travel Authority: further policy decisions 1 [PDF 277KB]
Electronic Travel Authority: next steps for policy decisions and regulations [PDF 6MB]
Electronic alerts and newsletters
Elements of effective governance
Eligibility and co-funding criteria
Eligibility for the research and development tax incentive
Eligibility self-assessment tool
Eliminate forced labour and people trafficking from supply chains
Eliminate waste and pollution
Elizabeth Heeg, Forest Owners Association
Ellen MacArthur Foundation
Email MBIE about board appointments
Email the Accident Compensation Policy team at MBIE
Email the Food Innovation Network
Embarking on a new DM planning process can be a lengthy exercise requiring a reasonable degree of commitment and resourcing. Stakeholders need to be clear about what they want to achieve and be mindful of the resources, capability and capacity available to develop and implement the plan. Small steps can be taken and built on over time as capacity and resources become available.
Embedding procedures requiring two or more people input before prosecution decisions are made
Embedding this policy in their business groups.
Embedding this policy in their group.
Emeline Paat-Dahlstrom and Eric Dahlstrom have been working in the space industry for over three decades. As part of a team of passionate space technologists and educators, they have helped create a social enterprise called SpaceBase, focused on space education, entrepreneurship and collaboration.
Emergency Caller Location Information
Emergency Caller Location Information Service
Emergency Management Planning 9
Emergency Voice Calling Services Code
Emergency calls in New Zealand
Emergency calls in New Zealand are made by calling 111. A main component of the emergency calling system is the Initial Call Answering Platform (ICAP) for the first answering of 111 calls.
Emerging Technologies Programme
Emerging market and in-depth reports
Emerging technologies programme
Emissions savings potential
Employee applies for annual holidays Abbreviations P = Portion of a week RDP = Relevan t Daily Pay ADP = Average Daily Pay OWP = Ordinary Weekly Pay AWE12m = Average weekly earnings over the last 12 months FBAPS = Family violence leave, bereavement leave, alternative holidays, public holidays, sick leave Employee applies or is eligible for FBAPS leave Confirm date range Agree what constitutes a working week Agree amount of leave being taken as a portion of a week (P) Calculate P*OWP and P*AWE12m
Employee groups listed in Schedule 1A receive additional employment protections in certain restructuring situations, set out in subpart 1 of Part 6A of the ERA.
Employees cooperate with other agencies including Oranga Tamariki and the New Zealand Police in a way that is in the best interest of the child and aligns with the purposes of the Act and associated legislation and regulation.
Employees earning over the threshold can continue to raise personal grievances on other grounds, for example discrimination, sexual or racial harassment, or union duress.
Employees have 90 days from the end of their employment to raise an unjustified dismissal claim, unless the employer agrees to the personal grievance being raised, or the delay was due to exceptional circumstances.
Employees returning from parental leave will be paid according to the normal rules for annual holidays, rather than their pay only being based on their average weekly earnings over the last 52 weeks.
Employees will be able to take annual holidays on a pro-rata basis in advance of their entitlement.
Employers and employees can opt back into unjustified dismissal protection, as well as continue to negotiate their own dispute resolution processes
Employers and employees will be able to negotiate the terms and conditions of individual employee agreements at the start of employment which can differ from the collective employment agreement.
Employers can adopt a range of approaches to meet their legal obligations that best suit their circumstances.  Employees may or may or not have entitlement transferred. And may or may not have the option whether to have entitlements recognised or paid out.
Employers must notify employees of this right in writing between 4 and 8 weeks before Easter Sunday. Failure to provide proper notice means employees cannot be compelled to work on that day.
Employers will also incur implementation costs 5. The implementation of the Taskforce recommendations will necessitate significant changes to every payroll system used by New Zealand employers, and there will be multiple steps in the end - to-end implementation process. These system changes will incur costs to employers and there may also be additional costs associated with accessing the specialist payroll skills and expertise that may be required.
Employers will be required to respond to written requests from unions for information on how specified pay deductions are calculated.
Employers will incur costs due to increased access to leave entitlements and new payment methodologies 2. The 2020 R egulatory Impact Statement estimated that the total additional cost to employers of adopting the Taskforce’s recommendations, due to the increa sed access to leave entitlements and the use of new leave payment methodologies (refer to Annex One), could be up to $310.3 million per year (with a corresponding benefit for employees).
Employers will provide a four-week payment for redundancies and layoffs, to discourage unnecessary redundancies and provide extra assurance that the scheme is only used by those who should be eligible, lowering costs to other employers. What do you think about this payment? Are there other ways to promote integrity?
Employers will still need to inform an employee:
Employment Agreement Builder
Employment Court Regulations 2000
Employment NZ (ENZ) completed initial interviews with employers of migrant workers as part of research to improve communication channels.
Employment NZ completed initial interviews with employers of migrant workers as part of research to improve communication channels.
Employment New Zealand website
Employment Relations (Extending Part 6A Protections to Security Officers) Order 2021 [PDF 141KB]
Employment Relations (Flexible Working Arrangements) Amendment Act 2007
Employment Relations Act 2000
Employment Relations Act 2000 amendments
Employment Relations Amendment Act
Employment Relations Authority
Employment Relations and Employment Standards charter
Employment Standards Legislation Act
Employment Strategy: October 2021 Report Back
Employment Strategy: Six-Monthly Report Back
Employment legislation reviews
Employment makes an important contribution to wellbeing.
Employment relations and standards
Employment relations and standards regulatory system
Employment standards are requirements such as the minimum wage, annual holidays and written employment agreements. They protect vulnerable workers and help to ensure workplaces are fair and competitive.
Employment, Skills and Immigration Policy
Enable Networks Limited Fibre Deed
Enable equitable sharing of benefits across employers, workers and communities
Enable lines owners to assess the likelihood and potential impact of a fall for trees they consider could be a risk to lines, then issue a Treefall Hazard Notice for moderate- and high-risk trees.
Enabling KiwiSaver investment in private assets - summary of discussion document
Enabling a future-focused regulatory regime
Enabling investment in offshore renewable energy discussion document
Enabling space business environment
Encourage other government agencies to deliver people trafficking training to relevant staff.
Encouraging changes in industrial energy use.
Endorses new and major changes to this policy
Energy Efficiency and Conservation Authority
Energy Minister Simon Watts has announced a second round of changes to the Electricity (Hazards from Trees) Regulations to better protect power lines from falling trees.
Energy and Resource Markets news
Energy and Resource Markets work programmes
Energy and natural resources
Energy and natural resources statistics and modelling
Energy consultations and reviews
Energy efficiency in New Zealand
Energy generation and markets
Energy hardship expert panel and reference group
Energy hardship research reports
Energy markets regulatory system
Energy portfolio weekly reports
Energy strategies for New Zealand
Enforce immigration and employment law to deter employer non-compliance through a fit-for-purpose offence and penalty regime.
Engage with us on social media
Engagement and Experience
Engineering Associates Registration Board
English: Ask for an interpreter [JPG, 365KB]
English: Government interpreting services
Enhance international prevention responses through regional co-operation
Enhancing support for displaced workers over the medium term [PDF 557KB]
Enhancing telecommunications regulatory and funding frameworks
Enrich Aotearoa New Zealand through sustainable tourism growth
Ensure compliance frameworks are robust, fit-for-purpose and adequately resourced.
Ensure government is well positioned to use aerospace-enabled data through capability building and improve access to datasets to support the delivery of public services like disaster response and recovery.
Ensure immigration settings, including for the Green List and Skilled Migrant Category are appropriately targeted to address skill gaps and prioritise skilled migrants.
Ensure new and existing staff in their teams are made aware of and comply with the policy
Ensure students and workers have access to career resources, information and support to make informed decisions.
Ensure the welfare system is focussed on effectively supporting people who can work into jobs. (MSD)
Ensure your agency has signed the new Panel contract by 31 March 2025.
Ensures awareness of this policy across MBIE
Ensures the policy is reviewed and updated by the agreed review date
Ensuring MBIE complies with the Employment Relations Act 2000 Parts 6AA and 6AB and the Health and Safety at Work Act 2015 in relation to flexible working
Ensuring employees are given appropriate information and training to assist them to comply with their obligations under this policy
Ensuring that people crossing the border and staying in New Zealand are entitled to do so.
Ensuring the electricity market is delivering fair and affordable prices.
Ensuring their business group complies with the Employment Relations Act 2000 Parts 6AA and 6AB and the Health and Safety at Work Act 2015 in relation to flexible working.
Ensuring their business groups are compliant with this policy and associated procedures
Ensuring their group is compliant with this policy.
Ensuring their team complies with the Employment Relations Act 2000 Parts 6AA and 6AB and the Health and Safety at Work Act 2015 in relation to flexible working.
Ensuring they carry out work in accordance with the agreed arrangements made with their people leader.
Entanglement swapping is the process by which one particle in the photon pair becomes entangled with a third particle. This new photon particle subsequently becomes entangled with the first particle without any direct interaction.
Enterprise Risk, Strategy and Transformation
Entity Performance and Investment
Environmental Chemistry (ENVS703)
Environmental impacts of space vehicle launches
Environmental management work
Environmental stewardship
Envisory (formerly known as Hale & Twomey).
Equal Pay Act: Improvements to pay equity legislation
Equal Pay Amendment Bill: Outstanding Issues and Approval for Introduction
Equitable Transitions Strategy
Equity, Diversity and Inclusion Capability Fund
Essential Skills visa approvals from the Pacific made up 14% of Pacific temporary workers.
Essential oil production can be part of a wider circular system. In this example, this is an example of how the essential oil goes into the circular economy. Obviously we can get high yields, we can use regenerative practices, and then through sustainable design with low packaging per kilo, we can use modern plant and equipment, especially easier at the beginning of a process, we can have potential for alternative energy sources, we can have reverse supply chain and we can convert used waste into alternative sources of energy ie the idea being that everything goes back in and stays within the system to and can be used again.
Essential oils are a critical core middle step to a wide range of platforms in the bioeconomy. What we did here for each of the 30 platforms we looked at what are the main production system that can feed into it, what is the biomass handling, say the primary and sometimes the secondary processing system ie in this case the essential oil extraction and then what does that then enable and what does it feed into, like a wide range of other sectors, like Tim said before, no product is an island on its own, it feeds into multiple other products.
Essential oils are in line with the desired direction for the bioeconomy. We are looking at these are the same 6 indicators we looked at earlier, for each of them we reviewed, for example, the increasing value-add. They are obviously a high-value output. They are an ingredient with high-value products that are being given to other high-value products. It is a win-win here.
Essentially this platform scales up potential oil production from a local biomass to a supplier-wide range of further processes. This is just an example of what we did for all of the 30 platforms. We did the situation, the complication, and the resolution.
Essentially with this one each of them has a slightly different format because they are a different industry/different product. With this one it was essentially what are they, a definition around what it is, what do we have as a resource to contribute to marine bioactives? Then we looked at specifically at our largest resources which is mussels, then fish oil, marine collagen, which is a growing area for New Zealand. Then we looked at the smaller and more emerging marine bioactives. We then looked at strategic themes across these bioactives. We then applied circular framework to it in terms of the circular economy and then at the end we looked at what is the situation in New Zealand. What is happening with growth etc? Then who are firms, who is investing, who is doing what and then just itemising at the back and profiling each of the selected firms that are in the industry.
Establish a Regional Infrastructure Fund with $1.2 billion in capital funding over the Parliamentary term.
Establish a national mission through the development, manufacture, launch and operation of one or more sovereign satellites and application of the data collected to meet a government need, such as supporting our maritime domain awareness and broader space domain awareness.
Establish and support a University Advisory Group to provide advice on the challenges and opportunities in the university system. (MOE/TEC)
Establish leadership group
Establish three new immigration infringement offences targeting non-compliant employer behaviour.
Established in 1990, HRDWG focuses on
Established in 2014, the New Zealand Screen Production Rebate (NZSPR) supports the screen sector by encouraging international and domestic production activity.
Establishes and maintains the Litigation Register
Establishing the Taskforce
Estimated discounts since 2010
Estimated health benefits of $11 million resulting from trail use for cycling, such as improved sense of wellbeing and mental health; an increased appreciation of the natural environment; and physical fitness improvements.
Estimated revenue 2018-19
Estimated space revenue across sub-sectors from 2018-19.
Estimating Labour Market Activity post COVID-19
Estimating the Risk to Life Safety during Earthquakes from Non-Structural Elements in Commercial Buildings in New Zealand
Ethical and sustainable work practice due diligence
Ethical and sustainable work practices
Ethnicity data was collected based on the 2005 Statistics New Zealand Level 2 Classifications for ethnicity.
European Commission guidance
Evaluating the New Zealand Screen Production Grant
Evaluation of 2016 changes to the Residential Tenancies Act
Evaluation of the 2010-2015 consumer law reforms
Evaluation of the Building Consent System
Evaluation of the New Zealand Cycle Trails
Evaluation of the Temporary Migration Worker Exploitation Review will commence.
Evaluation of the Welcoming Communities Pilot Programme - Final report [PDF, 1.21 MB]
Evaluation of the Welcoming Communities Pilot Programme - Summary report [PDF, 243 KB]
Eve Pleydell, Horticulture New Zealand
Even though this Temporary Migrant Worker Exploitation Review focuses on temporary migrant workers, including international students, many of the proposals to reduce their exploitation could benefit everyone in work, including New Zealand permanent residents and citizens.
Event organisers are not eligible to apply directly to the fund and should engage with their local RTO or council. The decision to apply for REPF funding will be made by the RTO or Council.
Events Transition Support Payment scheme (ETSP)
Events are an important part of the New Zealand domestic tourism landscape. Tourism New Zealand research indicates that up to 1/3 of domestic travel is primarily driven by people looking to participate in events.
Events can be either new or established, recurring events (the event must be able to measure return on investment where possible)
Events must be ticketed/paid or registration events
Events must not occur in the period 25 December to 7 January.
Events should, where possible, align with the Destination Management plan for the region.
Events that take place in the New Year summer period (25 December to 7 January).
Events the fund will not support
Events which are also receiving (within this Round 2 funding period) other central government funding including:
Events which occur in gateway regions administered by the following RTOs:
Every individual operator, director and chief executive of a postal operator must complete a Declaration by Individuals, Directors and Chief Executives form (PO2):
Every person wishing to gain a NAATI credential will need to have completed prerequisite training or a qualification. These are detailed on the NAATI website.
Every role should be suitable for some form of flexibility but not every type of flexibility will work for every role. Genuine business reasons may mean that some types of flexibility cannot be implemented for some roles.
Every year, more than 100,000 New Zealanders are made redundant, laid off, or have to stop working because of a health condition or disability.
Everyone should be able to participate in meaningful and fulfilling work irrespective of their ethnicity, gender, age, sexual orientation, health conditions, disabilities or any other personal characteristics. We acknowledge that some groups need additional support to achieve better employment outcomes. This requires system-wide change as well as within individual workplaces to be inclusive, embrace diversity and be free from discrimination and bias. We need to work together to address longstanding disadvantage, stereotypes and prejudices.
Everyone, irrespective of their needs, should have the opportunity to resolve disputes. This means dispute resolution schemes should be accessible, visible, and affordable for all people who may need to use them.
Everything we do at MBIE is about growing Aotearoa New Zealand for all. We recognise that a strong economy is one in which we use the skills, knowledge and time of our people in conjunction with our natural resources, and financial and physical capital to improve the wellbeing of current and future generations.
Evolution Networks Limited
Examination of current state of earthquake-prone building system, including cost-benefit analysis
Examines evidence about the effectiveness of policies aimed at enhancing the resilience of economic systems.
Examines trends in temporary and permanent migration to and from New Zealand
Examines which analytical tools are suited to 'transformative change' (forward-looking and transformative policies aimed at addressing challenges like climate change and involving changes to the structure of the economy).
Examining layers of history to protect lakes in Aotearoa New Zealand
Example - International obligations and payload permitting processes
Examples include Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) in the EU, Deposit Return Schemes (DRS) in Norway, South Australia and South Africa, and collection standards enacted in Belgium and Spain.
Examples include an inconsistent use of qualified practitioners, gaps in language assistance services availability outside business hours, and funding issues in relation to government contracted services.
Examples of TDPF grant co-funding
Examples of relevant international obligations commonly considered for payload permitting decisions
Excellent Science: Supports frontier research projects, fellowships, and exchanges for researchers.
Exceptions - copyright of third parties
Exchange of letters between Telecom and the Crown
Exclusive Economic Zone and Continental Shelf (Environmental Effects) Act 2012
Executive report of the Independent Taskforce on Workplace Health & Safety - He Korowai Whakaruruhau [PDF 1.5MB]
Existing blue warrants will expire for private vehicles on 7 June 2025.
Expand the applicability of the telecommunications regulatory regime to offshore providers
Expanding the circumstances under which WorkSafe can refuse, suspend, cancel or add conditions to operator registrations, where serious safety concerns arise.
Expenses, gifts and hospitality expended by the Chief Executive.
Experience Rating Framework
Experience Rating threshold for Medical Fees and Treatment Costs
Experience and product development (Attractions)
Explaining the differences between the costs in the Cabinet paper and the final figures
Explaining where people are in the process.
Explanation of puzzle graphic
Explore innovative ways for the government to apply aerospace technologies to address scientific, societal and national security challenges.
Explore the data and compare the GDPs of different territorial authorities and industries in New Zealand
Explore the provision of external regulatory advice to support efficient regulatory decision making by the New Zealand Space Agency and the Civil Aviation Authority for space and advanced aviation activities respectively.
Exposure draft of Credit Contracts and Consumer Finance (Buy Now Pay Later) Amendment Regulations 2022
Exposure draft of Health and Safety at Work (Adventure Activities) Amendment Regulations 2023
Expression of Interest Form for NZCT Fund.
Extending Paid Parental Leave to 26 weeks Cabinet Paper
Extending paid parental leave
Extension of earthquake-prone building remediation deadlines
External review into how the non-interference provisions of the Crown Minerals Act are effected
External security consultants
Extract from 2425-0319 MBIE Workplace Relations and Safety Policy weekly report for the period from 13 to 19 September 2024 [PDF 97KB]
Extract from BRIEFING-REQ-0008363: MBIE Workplace Relations and Safety Policy weekly report for the period from 24 January 2025 to 30 January 2024 [PDF 138KB]
Extreme Event application form
Extreme Weather Recovery Advice Fund
Extreme Weather Research Database
Extreme event recovery works on Great Rides to reopen and repair sections of trail that have been damaged by extreme events such as storm damage, fire, flooding or single event vandalism.
Extreme weather recovery efforts to benefit from Tourism Infrastructure Fund
Extreme weather science response
FBAPS leave: A collective term for Family violence leave, Bereavement leave, Alternative holidays, Public holidays and Sick leave.
Face to Face Interpreting
Face to Face Interpreting Service
Face to face interpreting service
Face to face interpreting service providers for NZSL listed by location.
Face to face interpreting service providers for community languages listed by location.
Face to face interpreting services listed by language group.
Facebook Community Standards
Facebook Statement of Rights and Responsibilities
Facilitate connections between schools, employers, and tertiary education organisations to ensure students are better prepared for employment and/or further education and training.
Fact sheets to help you learn what these changes mean for you, as well as more information about the building law reforms are available on
Failure to comply with this policy may be considered a breach of the Code of Conduct.
Fair Pay Agreement Working Group
Fair Pay Agreement Working Group Report [PDF 10MB]
Fair Pay Agreement discussion paper
Fair Pay Agreements - Regulatory Impact Statement [PDF 1.3MB]
Fair Pay Agreements Act 2022
Fair Pay Agreements Act Repeal Bill
Fair Pay Agreements Bill: Approval for public interest test criteria details and delegated authority for key FPA regulations [PDF 255KB]
Fair Pay Agreements Regulations
Fair Pay Agreements legislation
Fair Pay Agreements: Approval to draft [PDF 885KB]
Fair and accessible public services: Summary report on the use of interpreter services and other language assistance in New Zealand [PDF 103KB]
Familial relationships involved, including through adoption
Family dispute resolution
Family violence guidelines
Farsi: Ask for an interpreter [JPG, 347KB]
Fast broadband policy and regulation
Faun Watson is completing a PhD in Physics at Victoria University of Wellington, with a research interest in sustainable satellite de-orbiting devices.
Features of the incentive
February 2021 Inter-Agency Operations Group completed training with US Department of Justice on trafficking investigations.
Feedback is open from 2 May 2025 to 13 June 2025.
Feedback on changes to the Act will be considered alongside other proposed regulatory or legislative amendments. Further amendments may arise from workstreams relating to the statutory review of the Act and policy workstreams from the Space Policy Review.
Feedback report: proposed interpreter transition support package
Feedback, enquiry and complaints form
Feeling safe in a new environment may affect how quickly migrants settle and whether they decide to stay. Overall, most Pacific migrants (80%) reported feeling safe or very safe in New Zealand, similar to the proportion for recent migrants overall (82%). They were also less likely to report that they were treated unfairly because they were from overseas (37%) compared with recent migrants overall (56%).
Fewer parent category and skilled migrant category approvals were the main drivers behind a decline in residence approvals
Fibre on electricity lines
Fibre price-quality path and information disclosure
Fibre regulatory framework
Fighting climate change from space: MethaneSAT
Figure 1: Thirty high potential emerging bioeconomy opportunities for New Zealand . (Index page from Coriolis, 2023 ).
Figure 2: Safety Risk Management 6
Figure 3: Screenshot from the digital twin technology workshop demonstrating opportunities for digital twins in the built environment . Source : Digital technologies, digital twins and the circular and bioeconomy
Fiji was the largest source country of Essential Skills migrants from the Pacific.
Final Decision - Business and Consumer
Final Decision - Business and Consumer [PDF 682KB]
Final Decision - Consumer Advocacy Council Secretariat
Final Decision - Consumer Advocacy Council Secretariat [PDF 610KB]
Final Decision - Enhancing MBIE Property Services
Final Decision - Enhancing MBIE Property Services [PDF 913KB]
Final Decision - MBIE Foundations for the Future
Final Decision - MBIE Foundations for the Future [PDF 2.4MB]
Final Decision - MBIE Intelligence Re-alignment
Final Decision - MBIE Intelligence Re-alignment [PDF 891KB]
Final Government decisions for changes to be made via legislative amendment and/or non-regulatory measures.
Final Welcoming Communities Pilot Programme Report
Final fees and levies are set to apply from 1 December 2025 unless otherwise stated in the discussion document. You can expect to hear about the final changes to fees and levies before they take effect.
Final report summarising findings and high-level recommendations drafted and provided to Government
Finance and Expenditure Committee inquiry
Finance, Performance and Assurance
Financial Dispute Resolution Service
Financial Markets Authority
Financial Markets Authority Act 2011
Financial Markets Conduct Act
Financial Markets Conduct Act 2013
Financial Markets Conduct Amendment Bill and Financial Service Providers (Registration and Dispute Resolution) Amendment Bill: Policy Approvals and Approval for introduction [PDF 301KB]
Financial Markets Supervisors Act 2011
Financial Records relating to security services [PDF 7.2MB]
Financial Reporting Act 2013
Financial Service Providers (Registration and Dispute Resolution) Act 2008
Financial Service Providers The Financial Service Providers (FSP) register was established under the Financial Service Providers (Registration and Dispute Resolution) Act 2008. Several legislative changes have been introduced to the FSP register since its introduction in 2010. In March 2021 significant changes included the implementation of a new financial advice regime and, before that, introduction of new licen sed services, such as non -bank deposit takers and insurers and extending the register to include new financial markets, including registered and licenced services such as peer -to-peer lending and crowd funding. Table 1 5 below shows the proposed adjustments to current services paid for services on the FSP register. Table 1 5: Proposed fees for Financial Service Providers register services $ (excluding GST) Financial Service Providers register Unit Cost Proposed fee Proposed levies Proposed total charge Current charge (fee) Change in charge % change Registration 284.39 285.00 - 285.00 300.00 (15.00) (5%) Annual renewal 75.61 75.00 - 75.00 75.00 - - Registration and annual renewal fees The additional investment in the register over the past four years has resulted in an increase in the overall cost of the register. This recent work to enhance the register has had a positive flow -on effect by creating new system approaches to software dev elopment that could be utilised by other registers administered by the Companies Office. For this reason, that benefit for all Companies Office registers has meant that t he annual return fee for the FSP register can be maintained at the current level of $ 75.00 and the registration fee can be reduced . Incorporated Societies The Incorporated Societies register provides the infrastructure for incorporated societies and the Registrar of Incorporated Societies to meet legislative requirements. The Incorporated Societies Act 2022 (2022 Act) came fully into force on 5 October 2023 and will co- exist with the Incorporated Societies Act 1908 (1908 Act) until 5 April 2026 when the latter is revoked. Societies registered under the 1908 Act will not be subject to the new legislation until they reregister under the 2022 Act. If an existing society does not reregister during the transition period from 32 5 October 2023 to 5 April 2026, it will cease to be incorporated. In August 2023, Cabinet agreed to set registration and restoration fees under the 2022 Act at the same level as those under the 1908 Act: • Registration fee : $88.89; and • Restoration fee : $177.78 These fees have now been set in the Incorporated Societies Regulations 2023 , which came into force on 5 October 2023, and are intended to cover the period until the new fees and levies are in place . Fees under the 1908 Act were last updated in 1999 . Since th en, the overall cost of running the register has increased. This is because electronic functionality of the register has improved, as well as increasing costs related to contact centre support services and services that ensure compliance. The proposals incorporate education and awareness costs forecasted over the next four years related to the introduction of new legislation to ensure existing entities understand their filing obligations under the new 2022 Act (see Section 3: Proposed additional expenditure ). Table 1 6 below outlines the proposed new fees and levies. Table 1 6: Proposed fees for Incorporated Societies register services $ (excluding GST) Incorporated Societies register Unit Cost Proposed fee Proposed levies Proposed total charge Current charge (fee) Change in charge % change Registration* 44.22 45.00 27.00 72.00 88.89 (16.89) (19%) Annual return* 9.00 9.00 27.00 36.00 - 36.00 - Restoration 224.87 225.00 - 225.00 177.78 47.22 27% Amalgamation 225.00 225.00 - 225.00 - 225.00 - Conversions to be an incorporated society* 44.22 45.00 27.00 72.00 - 72.00 - *CO$15.00, NZBN levy $12.00
Financial Services Complaints Limited
Financial Services Reforms - policy approvals - Minute of Decision [PDF 211KB]
Financial Services Reforms: policy approvals and approval of the Credit Contracts and Consumer Finance Amendment Bill for introduction [PDF 293KB]
Financial Services Reforms: policy decisions [PDF 398KB]
Financial Statement filing Entities that meet certain criteria under the Companies Act , and under the FMC Act are required to file financial statements with the Companies Office. Table 1 4 on the next page shows the proposed decrease in the financial statement filing fee .
Financial hardship can take a range of forms. Consumers may be unable to make payments on BNPL, with any missed payments adding to the debt they face through late payment fees. It could also mean that consumers who do meet their BNPL payment obligations are not able to afford other expenses (such as a power bill or groceries) because the payment instalment is collected automatically via a debit card or credit card.
Financial markets and advisers
Financial markets charter
Financial markets conduct
Financial markets conduct regulation
Financial markets conduct regulatory system
Financial mentoring organisations, who work to help New Zealanders in financial difficulty, have made MBIE aware that BNPL could be creating financial hardship for some consumers.
Financial support for attendance
Financial support is provided for most jobs losses
Find a provider by language group
Find information about building management in emergencies
Find out about New Zealand trade mark registration and protection on the IPONZ website
Find out about key projects designed to strengthen and build long term sustainability in the tourism sector in Aotearoa New Zealand.
Find out how this will impact you
Find out how today's experts got into their current roles
Find out how you can provide translation or interpreting support to the New Zealand Public Service.
Find out how your space career could take off!
Find out if your agency is eligible
Find out more about MethaneSAT:
Find out more about Regulations
Find out more about how we prepare the international tourism forecasts and what they cover.
Find out more about infringement fees and penalties levels:
Find out more about science and innovation research data.
Find out more about the application process, unrecoverable costs, triggers for payment as well as information for suppliers and vendors.
Find out more about the atmospheric science project
Find out more about the services available on the NZ Relay website
Find out more on our Space-related Opportunities page
Find out who can assist with document translation.
Find your local Police station
Find your local authority
Finding the right formula for success
Findings from the evaluation of the 2018 pilot of strengthened settlement information for the Pacific Access Category (PAC) and Samoan Quota (SQ) ballot winners. The purpose of the evaluation is to understand whether the pilot was successful in helping PAC and SQ migrants prepare for a new life in New Zealand. This will provide a view on how the resources and processes could be improved in the future to better help Pacific migrants plan for life in New Zealand.
Findings from the evaluation of the Welcoming Communities pilot programme. The interim and final evaluation reports cover the development, implementation, early outcomes and lessons learned during the 2-year pilot programme from July 2017 to June 2019.
Findings from the evaluation of the Welcoming Communities pilot programme. The interim and final evaluation reports cover the development, implementation, early outcomes and lessons learned during the 2-year pilot programme.
Findings from the evaluation of the pilot are provided in 3 annual evaluation reports. The third report presents the findings from the final year of the evaluation and builds on the findings from the previous two yearly reports.
Findings from the targeted review
Findings from the targeted review were presented to the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety in November 2020. Based on the findings, the Government announced that it planned to make improvements to the regime. MBIE undertook the second phase of work to develop proposals for change in more detail, targeted to areas identified in the review. A public consultation on possible changes to the regime was conducted in 2021.
Findings from this research will contribute to building a picture of Pacific migrant settlement outcomes in New Zealand and challenges faced by these migrants.
Findings of an independent review into the AEWV was released in February 2024.
First, Marine Bioactives from New Zealand.
First, we would like to thank the lead organisation, Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment. This project was also supported by Ministry for Primary Industries, Ministry for the Environment and New Zealand Trade and Enterprise. Also, thanks to the businesses, academics, researchers etc that helped us out with this project. We really appreciated it, thank you.
Fiscal measures can be used as a policy tool to encourage behaviour change and reduced resource use. In addition to tax, fiscal measures include levies, minimum prices for materials/products, grants or guaranteed returns/payments. Grants are often used to stimulate a desired change in society or the economy, such as the take up of an early stage, beneficial new technology.
Fit for purpose consumer credit legislation - high-cost credit contracts provisions
Fit for purpose consumer credit legislation: Summary of discussion document
Fit for purpose financial services conduct regulation: Summary of discussion document
Fit for purpose regulation of consumer credit
Fixed -term agreement: Employment relationships with a set start and end day or event, along with a genuine reas on, based on reasonable grounds , for such an arrangement. This arrangement , including the way in which the employment will end and the reasons for it ending that way, must be clearly specified in writing in the employment agreement (Section 28 of the Act ).
Fixed-term and casual workers who can show a regular pattern of work with an employer, and a reasonable expectation of future income, will be treated like permanent workers and eligible for the full support offered if their regular pattern of work is disrupted.
Flexibility requires give and take between the employee, people leader and team. It also places collective obligations on employees, people leaders and teams to be open and adaptable so that it works for everyone.
Flexible (discretionary) leave
Flexible working at MBIE policy
Flexible working needs to work for the agency, teams, and employees. Consideration should be given to how flexible work arrangements can maintain or enhance service delivery and the performance of agencies, teams, and employees. It should not result in increased workloads for employees working flexibly, or for other team members who are not.
Flexible working proposals can be made at any time in an employment life cycle including during recruitment, and there are no limits to how many times a proposal can be made.
Flexible working should not be viewed as something which is just agreed between an employee and people leader. This means that the impact of arrangements should be considered on teams and the agency as a whole.
Flip the Fleet is a nationwide project aimed at getting more Kiwis behind the wheel of an electric vehicle.
Flow on benefits to local industry
Following a number of recent complaints from consumers about ticket reselling practices, the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs has announced a review into ticket reselling in New Zealand.
Following consultation, the Government approved various changes to the Accredited Employers Programme.
Following consultation, the Minister for Media and Communications has announced a suite of regulatory changes to improve telecommunications services for New Zealanders and promote innovation
Following discussion between the telecommunications sector and the Ministry of Economic Development and CFH, the Minister of Communications and Information Technology and the Minister of Finance have written to the New Zealand Telecommunications Forum (TCF) clarifying CFH's role.
Following the 2023 North Island severe weather events MBIE commissioned a review of how the rapid building assessment system worked during the response to assess how well it functioned and identify any areas for improvement.
Following the Whakaari/White Island eruption on 9 December 2019, the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety directed MBIE to undertake a targeted review of the adventure activities regulatory regime.
Following the review of the Telecommunications Act 2001, the legislation:
Following this, at the request of the ACC Minister, we commissioned Miriam R Dean CNZM QC to undertake an Independent Review. Her report found that some (though not all) of the concerns raised by Acclaim were valid and recommended a number of possible improvements to existing practice.
Food Secure Communities Programme
Food South Otago located at Otago University in Dunedin.
Food Waikato located near Hamilton
Food and Beverage Directory
Food and Beverage Information Project
FoodBowl, Mangere, Auckland
FoodSouth located at Lincoln in Canterbury
For New Zealand Sign language Face to Face Interpreting Services please visit:
For New Zealand to prosper we need to increase the economic, social, environmental, and cultural outcomes from our limited biological resources and manage the trade-offs arising from increased demand.
For a directory of publicly-available, non-personal New Zealand government held datasets go to
For any questions, please get in touch with us at
For any trade labour submissions, questions or other matters please contact us through:
For avoidance of doubt, the Prosecution policy does not apply to staff involved in civil enforcement (i.e. non-criminal or offence proceedings) of MBIE legislation (e.g. before occupational licensing boards or the Employment Relations Authority).
For businesses, R&D is recognised as a key indicator of innovation, which enhances their ability to be successful in the evolving global marketplace.
For clarity, neither GYSS nor MBIE will cover:
For delivery function, a prompt could be to assess whether the regulator is clear about its responsibilities and what the regulated parties are required to do.
For each person who has a 10% or more ownership or control interest in the organisation : • Nam e • Principal business address • Current nationality (relevant only to natural persons) Information for Launch licences Launch details • A description of the launch vehicle (including name, payload capacity, and capabilities of the launch vehicle) • Name and lo cation of the proposed launch facility or facilities from which launches will occur • Expectations as to the duration of the licence and/or number of launches covered and launch windows (if known at the time of application) • Details of the intended basic orb ital parameters (including the nodal period, inclination, apogee, and perigee) of any part of a launch vehicle that is intended to reach outer space
For each successful Endeavour Fund application from 2017, this spreadsheet details:
For eligibility assessment contact New Zealand Government Procurement
For enquiries about positions, please contact
For example, these infringements apply to:
For example, when assessing the policy function, a prompt could be to assess whether policy teams are able to clearly articulate what the regime is trying to achieve.
For food, a focus on innovation upstream in the food value chain, would reduce environmental impacts and help to maintain competitiveness of trade which is increasingly focused on environmental sustainability. Approaches that could be considered include scaling regenerative agriculture and aquaculture, innovation in alternative protein foods, increasing consumer-facing information, supporting innovation networks, and place-based initiatives to test and demonstrate food system solutions.
For further information (except legal advice) email
For further information about specific award notices please contact the relevant government agency.
For further information or enquiries about Language Assistance Services please write to us on
For further information regarding information or data sharing:
For guidance on how to make a complaint please refer to:
For guidance on making submissions in relation to the CPTPP and UKFTA Labour Chapters, please see the following links:
For import-dependent subsectors, circular economy models that reduce consumption by extending service lives, sharing access to products or creating jobs through reuse, remanufacturing or repair, may reduce supply risks and global emissions.
For instance, MBIE recently announced the successful proposals for our second dedicated investment in space research through the $3 million Catalyst: Strategic Space call, which will accelerate the development of space sector capability in New Zealand by building partnerships with leading international space organisations.
For international investors and people interested in doing space and advanced aviation business in New Zealand
For more detailed information on how the changes could affect you, visit the
For more information about Briefings being developed by other departments, see:
For more information about eligibility visit the NZGP website
For more information about our Association and Treaty documents:
For more information about the RSE scheme, please see the following links:
For more information about the Screen Industry Workers Act 2022, please visit:
For more information about the changes, you can contact us at
For more information about the charter, supporting documentation and algorithm use across government, click the link below:
For more information about why New Zealand is an attractive place to do space business, see
For more information and current funding opportunities:
For more information including the benefits of participating and key definitions, read the key information document:
For more information on Regulatory System Amendments Bills, contact us at
For more information on the privacy laws in New Zealand and contact details for the Office of the Privacy Commissioner, visit the
For more information on this report, please email
For more information or advice, contact our Horizon Europe secretariat by emailing:
For more information, contact:
For more information, please contact
For more information, please contact us:
For more information, see our Diversity Statement
For more information, visit the Grow Regions website
For more see the following link.
For people looking to start, manage or grow their space or advanced aviation business
For phone numbers and postal addresses, see the main
For queries about New Zealand involvement in Horizon Europe email
For questions or concerns, please contact us at
For security reasons, we suggest you send the link and password by separate methods. For example, send the link by email and the password by text message.
For specific details on what is available, contact your local DHB.
For successful candidates, this will be followed by the next phase, which is a set of psychological interviews and group tests before medical testing.
For the 2024 release, we present results of a simplified model with estimates for the year ended March 2023 and updates for the previous years.
For the board member recruitment process, MBIE:
For the monitor and evaluate function a prompt could be to assess whether the responsible agency encourages feedback and the compliance and enforcement function a prompt could be to assess whether the agencies with an enforcement role comply with the enforcement strategy.
For the purpose of this policy, the following publication pathways are considered acceptable:
For the purposes of issues relating to disclosure, prosecutor has an alternative meaning. With disclosure, the functions of the prosecutor are shared between the investigator and the lawyer responsible for the file.
For the purposes of this fund the following RTOs are not eligible:
For the purposes of this fund, an RTO is one of the 30 member organisations of Regional Tourism New Zealand. A list of these organisations is available on the Regional Tourism New Zealand website.
For the purposes of this policy, it is acceptable for either of the following versions of a manuscript to be deposited in an Open Access repository:
For the up-to-date information about MBSF coverage, please visit:
For this project to add value, we are heavily dependent on survey responses across the space and advanced aviation supply chains and the quality of information provided.
For this reason, it may be helpful to ensure there are adequate information and advisory services for businesses to help them understand and meet any requirements, where possible. The government has an important role to utilise existing information channels, such as through trade relationships and knowledge networks, to maintain awareness of international developments and implications for New Zealand. Our existing and future trade agreements and broader international relationships can act as policy dialogue channels with other countries. These settings can enable New Zealand exporting firms to meet the environmental expectations of our trade partners and consumers.
For us, success looks like:
Forced labour, people trafficking and slavery are serious forms of exploitation seen internationally and within New Zealand. Addressing these practices requires a whole-of-society response, undertaken through strong partnerships across government agencies and with civil society, businesses, unions, academia and international partners.
Foreign government applicants, aligned with strategic interests
Foreign licences, permits or authorisations For any foreign licences, permits or authorisations applied for, granted or declined, provide: • Details of the foreign regulator (name, location) • Authorisation or registration numbers/identifiers and copies of the relevant authorisation • Date of issue and length of time in which the authorisation is in effect • Entity/entities in respect of which auth orisation has been issued • Information regarding any conditions imposed and the nature of those conditions
Foreign licences, permits or authorisations For any foreign licences, permits or authorisations applied for, granted or declined: • Details of the foreign regulator (name, location) • Authorisation or registration numbers/identifiers and copies of the relevant authorisation • Date of issue and length of time in which the authorisation is in effect • Entity/entities in respect of which authorisation has been issued • Information regarding any conditions imposed and the nature of those conditions Permit for launch of payload overseas If the applicant is applying for an overseas payload permit, in addition to the information required above : • the name and location of the overseas launch facility from which the payload is intended to be launched; and 23
Foreign margin requirements for OTC derivatives
Forestry and wood processing spotlight report series
Forestry and wood processing spotlight reports
Foreword from the Minister for Space
Foreword from the Minister of Tourism
Formal flexible working arrangement proposals will be responded to in writing within 10 working days of the proposal being made. A final decision in writing must be given within a month of the proposal being made. Proposals made under the Domestic Violence Act must have a final decision within 10 working days of the proposal.
Formality empowerment spectrum
Formatting and Structure 10
Former Employment (Pay Equity and Equal Pay) Bill
Former Refugees, Recent Migrants and Ethnic Communities Employment Action Plan - released in March 2022
Former Refugees, Recent Migrants, and Ethnic Communities
Forming a clearer and fairer cost recovery structure
Forum documents released prior to February 2020
Framework for paying AL as a regular part of an employees pay (pay - as - you - go (PAYG))
Framework for providing AL entitlement
Fraudulent work experience for fijian forestry workers [PDF 251KB]
Free advice and information on your rights
Free, phone-based service that helps resolve a workplace issue early, quickly and informally
Freedom camping has a long history in New Zealand-Aotearoa. Many New Zealanders and international visitors enjoy travelling and experiencing a range of camping experiences around the country, including camping for free.
Freedom camping infringements cannot be applied to people experiencing homelessness. Council enforcement staff should refer these people to social support agencies when appropriate.
From 1 July 2017 the national earthquake-prone building system took effect under the Building Act 2004.
From 1 July 2023, national quarantine and isolation (referred to as MIQ) will transfer to the New Zealand health system.
From 1 July 2026, introduce a 25% discount on levies to riders that have completed an advanced rider safety course (e.g. RideForever).
From 1 September 2017 pool manufacturers and retailers must supply notices with pools. The Building (Pool Manufacturers and Retailers) notice 2017 sets out the requirements for the notices.
From 2018 to 2024, we held a review into New Zealand's insurance contract law to ensure it facilitates well-functioning insurance markets.
From 2020 we will start to add to the ORCID records of successful applicants public facing summary details of their awarded funding.
From 2020, Chorus and the local fibre companies are already required under their open access deeds to offer an unbundled mass-market fibre service on commercial terms.
From 2020, the digital technologies sector focused on government and industry working together to start implementing a series of activities to see the sector reach its full potential. Additionally, by accelerating growth of the digital sector, this ITP aimed to work towards a diversified, lower-emission, higher-wage and resilient economy in New Zealand.
From 2023, students can study Space Science at Victoria University of Wellington. Topics covered include:
From April 2020 to June 2020, we called for expression of interests for COVID-19 Innovation Acceleration Fund funding. The initial size of the Fund was $25 million (excluding GST) with an anticipated minimum proposal size of $50,000 (excluding GST) and a criteria that projects needed to achieve impact within 18 months.
From classical to quantum
From the Far North to Southland, more than $934,000 has been confirmed for maintenance projects on the Great Rides of the New Zealand Cycle Trails, the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment announced today.
From the initial engagement that we've done we have seen that the circular economy is not the prime reason why people use digital twins. It is more about efficiency and cost saving. That's the key driver for digital twins and also better management of resources. So being unashamedly admitting here, that circular economy is almost like a byproduct of the ability to do more circular things, a byproduct of that drive for efficiency and cost savings and better management that the digital twins created. We are going to use some slides from the digital team at Aurecon just to show the hypothetical example for you. And we're looking at optimising building asset management.
From their first day of employment, eligible employees will be entitled to bereavement leave and family violence leave, and to begin accruing sick leave. Other employees will be eligible after 3 months if they meet the new tests.
From time to time we seek public comment on a specific issue relating to the building industry through a formal consultation process.
From time to time we seek public comment on a specific issue through a formal consultation process.
From time to time, we review employment and accident compensation legislation. Our current and past reviews are listed on this page.
From time to time, we review immigration legislation. Our current and past reviews are listed on this page.
From what is known of toxicology, chemistry, physical properties, or other attributes of the studied risk or hazard, it makes biological sense to suggest that exposure leads to the disease or injury.
Fuel Market Financial Performance Study 2017
Fuel security in New Zealand
Full Impact Statement Template | 1 Coversheet : Improving the Holidays Act 2003
Full Impact Statement Template | 10 continue to struggle to comply with their obligations and issues with entitlements and payments will persist . 2.4 What do stakeholders think about the problem ? The primary stakeholders are employers and employees. Many employers are struggling to comply with their obligations under the current Act and a large number of employees are not receiving their correct entitlements. Both groups stand to benefit from an improvement to the legislation . Payroll providers are another interested stakeholder group. They attempt to implement the obligations outlined in the Act in their systems and seek to provide employers with products that are compliant, efficient and effective. The Holidays Act Taskforce released an issues paper in August 2018 which set out its understanding of the key issues with the Act7. It saw these as being that the Act is not prescriptive enough, it is too complex, and there is not enough clarity over certain terms used. The Taskforce received 87 substantive submissions on the issues paper from employers, payroll providers and individuals . The vast majority of submissions (92%) felt that the issues paper accurately captured the main issues with the Act. There is general a greement from stakeholders as to what the main issues with the Act are, as well as that legislative change is the best way to address them. This aligns with MBIE’s conceptualisatio n of the problems with the Act. 2.5 What are the objectives sought in re lation to the identified problem? The key objectives of improving the Act are to:  make the provision of, and payment for, entitlements to holidays and leave simpler and more readily applicable to the range of working arrangements in the labour market  provide clarity and certainty to employers and employees so that employees receive their correct entitlements, and remuneration for them, and employers’ indirect compliance costs are minimised  aim to pro tect the overall entitlements for employees  make obligations easier to systematise and implement in payroll systems.
Full Impact Statement Template | 11 options as the group’s purpose was to suggest improvements to the legislation , and because a number of non -regulatory initiatives had already been implemented as part of the Labour Inspectorate’s payroll strategy. The Taskforce’s options were shaped by research, i nternational comparisons and consultation. For the majority of issues considered, MBIE (as the Taskforce Secretariat) provided detailed policy papers outlining the various options and their relative advantages and disadvantages. In addition, the Taskforce consulted with a small group of payroll providers on some of its recommendations and made some changes in light of the responses received, such as not progressing with a proposal to apportion commission or incentive payments across pay periods. Option One – The Taskforce’s proposals The Taskforce’s proposed approach is an improved status quo, where the existing units of entitlement are retained (weeks for annual holidays, days for other forms of leave) and the focus is on addressing known i ssues with the e xisting Act. The group was guided by three key principles when making recommendations : certainty, transparency and practicality. It wanted the recommendations to provide the certainty that employers and employees require, to ensure that employees are fully informed about their leave entitlements, and to work in the real world. It also wanted to ensure that no employee would be worse off under any of its proposals. With regards to annual holidays, t he Taskforce recommended that:  annual holidays entitlements should be calculated, taken, paid and held in weeks or portions of weeks  a clear process should be followed to determine how much of an employee’s leave entitlement should be used for a period of time away from work (this involves using the days and hours of work that are set out in an employment agreement or roster, or if not available, an averaging approach)  employees should become entitled to four weeks’ leave after 12 months continuous employment, but have the ability to take leave in advance on a pro - rata basis  annual holidays should be paid at the greater of Ordinary Leave Pay8, average weekly pay for the last four or 13 weeks, and average weekly pay for the last 52 weeks  the following definition of ‘gross earnings’ should be used for leave payment calculations: an employee’s leave payment should reflect all cash payments received, except direct reimbursements for costs incurred . The Taskforce could not agree whether the short -run average weekly pay in the payment calculations should be based on the previous four or 13 weeks, and referred this decision to the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety. The Minister proposed that the second reference period in the annual holida ys payment methodology should be 13 weeks. The Taskforce’s proposals provide greater prescription to areas of ambiguity in the Act. They provide rules for how to calculate a ‘week’ or ‘otherwise working day’ for leave purposes, particularly for workers wit h variable working patterns for whom it is currently difficult to calculate , and clarify which payments must be included in calculations . They
Full Impact Statement Template | 12 also reduce the number of payment calculations , remove the need for an employer to decide on a specific payment c alculation due to the ‘greater of’ approach for annual holidays and leave , and better define key terms. This option provides the clarity and certainty that employers and employees are seeking and will help to ensure that employees receive their correct ent itlements and remuneration for them. This will reduce future remediation issues, particularly the costly payroll investigations and the need for arrears payments. This option also seeks to protect employees’ entitlements and can be implemented in payroll s ystems. Option Two – An hours -based accrual system for annual holidays, with other aspects following the Taskforce’s proposals Option Two proposes a fundamentally different approach for how annual holidays entitlements are calculated, taken, paid and held. It departs from the principle that annual holidays entitlements are based on the work pattern at the time the holiday s are taken, and introduces a system where entitlements are based on an employee’s arrangements at the time they ‘earned’ the m. This option adopts the remaining Taskforce proposals , including holding other forms of leave in days . Under Option Two , all employees would earn annual holidays in hours at a set percentage rate (7.69% of every hour worked would give employees the equivalent of four weeks annual holidays per year). The employee’s annual holidays balance would accrue in hours as they worked and any holidays taken would be calculated and deducted in hours. An accrual system, by definit ion, means that e mployees would receive holidays and payments based on their arrangements at the time they ‘ earned’ them (rather than at the time of taking the holidays ). Hours that would accrue annual holidays would be determined as follows:  For salaried workers, hours that accrue annual holidays are those set out in the employment agreement (i.e. what is usually expected to be worked) plus any additional hours that are agreed and paid separately to the core hours in the employment agreement.  For workers paid on a daily or hourly rate, hours that accrue annual holidays are any hours that they are paid for (including overtime). The following process would be used to determine how much annual holidays would need to be taken for a period of time away from work:  If the number of hours an employee would have worked on a specific day is set in an employment agreement or work roster, then this figure should be used.  If the number of hours an employee would have worked is not set out in an employment agreement or work roster, then an average working day should be determined by calculating the average daily hours the employee worked on all corresponding calendar days in the previous 13 week s. For example, if the employee wishes to take holidays on a Mon day, then the average hours worked on all Mondays in the 13 week period should be used.  This process would need to be carried out for each day of holidays the employee wishes to take. 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:06:16
Full Impact Statement Template | 13 The greater of the following should be paid for the relevant period of a nnual holidays : 1. Ordinary Leave Pay (base rate plus any scheduled overtime, allowance, commission and incentive payments) 2. Average Leave Pay 13 (average hourly rate in the last 13 weeks9 multiplied by the amount of leave being taken in hours) 3. Average Leave P ay 52 (average hourly rate in the last 52 weeks multiplied by the amount of leave being taken in hours) The proposed new definition of ‘gross earnings’ would be used for payment calculations. This includes all cash payments received , except direct reimbursements for costs incurred. The employee would be entitled to take any annual holidays that had accrued to date, but could take leave in advance if agreed to by the employer. There would also be no need for pay -as-you-go provisions , in contrast to Option One . This option responds to feedback received from many stakeholders for an hours -based accrual system . Many of the submissions received on the Taskforce’s issues paper indicated a strong support for an accrual system based on hours a nd for a simplified system with few er calculations. Some of the payroll providers the Taskforce engaged with on the draft recommendations also raised concerns with how annual holidays were conceptualised and suggested different accrual approaches. As with Option One, this approach provides greater prescription for how to calculate entitlements and payments and better defines key terms. It is also simpler than the current Act in respect to the hours -based accrual system for annual holidays and the removal of additional payment calculation s. These changes can be implemented in payroll systems, provide the clarity and certainty that employers and employees are seeking , and are simpler in many respects when compared to the current Act. This will help to ensure t hat employees receive their correct entitlements and remuneration for them , helping to eliminate remediation issues such as costly payroll investigations and the need for arrears payments. However, a small number of employees could be worse off under an accrual approach when compared with the status quo or Option One , and some employees would likely find the shift from having their entitlement s held in weeks to accrued hours confusing . The specific proposals for options one and two are provided in Table 1.
Full Impact Statement Template | 14 Table 1: Option One and Option Two proposals Theme Option One – Taskforce proposals Option Two – Hours-based accrual (differences highlighted) Payment for annual holidays and FBAPS leave  The greater of the following should be paid for the relevant period of annual leave: o Ordinary Leave Pay (base rate plus any scheduled overtime, allowance, commission and incentive payments) o Average weekly pay for the last four or 13 weeks (the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety subsequently chose a 13-week reference period) o Average weekly pay for the last 52 weeks.  Each day (or part -day) of FBAPS leave should be paid based on the greater of: o Ordinary Leave Pay o Average Daily Pay  The gre ater of the following should be paid for the relevant period of annual leave: o Ordinary Leave Pay (base rate plus any scheduled overtime, allowance, commission and incentive payments) o Average Leave Pay 13 (average hourly rate in the last 13 weeks multiplied by the amount of leave being taken in hours) o Average Leave Pay 52 (average hourly rate in the last 52 weeks multiplied by the amount of leave being taken in hours)  Each day (or part -day) of FBAPS leave should be paid based on the greater of: o Ordinary Leave Pay o Average Daily Pay Annual holidays entitlement  Annual holidays entitlements should be calculated, taken, paid and held in weeks or portions of weeks.  Employees should become entitled to four weeks’ leave after 12 months continuous employment, but have the ability to take leave in advance on a pro -rata basis .  A clear process should be followed to determine how much of an employee’s leave entitlement should be used for a period of time away from work. Where an employee’s days and hours of work ar e set out in an employment agreement, shift roster or other document and these are an accurate reflection of the employee’s actual working pattern, these agreed days and hours should be used as the basis for determining leave entitlements and deductions .  The ‘parental leave override’ in the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act 1987 should be removed, to address discrimination against parents who take time off to care for their young children.  The ability for employers to use pay - as-you-go (PAYG) for employees on fixed -term contracts of less than 12 months should be removed and a  Annual holidays entitlements should be calculated, taken, paid and held in hours.  Employees earn annual holidays at a set percentag e rate (7.69%) . For salaried workers, hours that accrue leave are those set out in the employment agreement (plus paid overtime); for workers paid a daily or hourly rate, hours that accrue leave are any hour s that they are paid for.  A clear process should be followed to determine how much of an employee’s leave entitlement should be used for a period of time away from work. Where an employee’s days and hours of work are set out in an employment agreement, shi ft roster or other document and these are an accurate reflection of the employee’s actual working pattern, these agreed days and hours should be used as the basis for determining how much leave to deduct .  The ‘parental leave override’ in the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act 1987 should be removed, to address discrimination against parents who take time off to care for their young children. 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:06:16
Full Impact Statement Template | 15 more detailed definition should be provided for when PAYG can be used because a work pattern is ‘intermittent or irregular’.  An employer’s ability to require employees to att end work under an availability provision should be suspended from the end of the last shift the employee works before their leave period until the start of the first shift they work on their return from leave.  The following definition of ‘gross earnings’ s hould be used for leave payment calculations: an employee’s leave payment should reflect all cash payments received, except direct reimbursements for costs incurred’.  The ability for employers to use pay-as-you-go (PAYG) for employees should be removed.  An emp loyer’s ability to require employees to attend work under an availability provision should be suspended from the end of the last shift the employee works before their leave period until the start of the first shift they work on their return from leave.  The following definition of ‘gross earnings’ should be used for leave payment calculations: an employee’s leave payment should reflect all cash payments received, except direct reimbursements for costs incurred’. FBAPS leave entitlement  FBAPS leave should co ntinue to be held in days.  Eligible employees should be entitled to bereavement leave and family violence leave from the first day of employment. Eligible employees should be entitled to one day of sick leave from their first day of employment, with an add itional day per month of employment until the full entitlement of five days is reached after four months.  Employees should have the ability to take sick leave and family violence leave in units of less than a day on a proportionate basis for time and pay with a minimum amount of a quarter of a day.  There should be a new test for which employees are eligible for sick, bereavement and family violence leave.  A new prescriptive methodology should be used to determine whether a day is an Otherwise Working Day for an employee for FBAPS purposes.  The list of people for whom bereavement leave applies should be extended to include a more modern understanding of family members.  Provisions relating to transferring public holidays should be amended to reduce the chance of employees being disadvantaged by the transfer.  FBAPS leave should continue to be held in days.  Eligible employees should be entitled to bereavement leave and fa mily violence leave from the first day of employment. Eligible employees should be entitled to one day of sick leave from their first day of employment, with an additional day per month of employment until the full entitlement of five days is reached after four months.  Employees should have the ability to take sick leave and family violence leave in units of less than a day on a proportionate basis for time and pay with a minimum amount of a quarter of a day.  There should be a new test for which employees a re eligible for sick, bereavement and family violence leave.  A new prescriptive methodology should be used to determine whether a day is an Otherwise Working Day for an employee for FBAPS purposes.  The list of people for whom bereavement leave applies shou ld be extended to include a more modern understanding of family members.  Provisions relating to transferring public holidays should be amended to reduce the chance of employees being disadvantaged by the transfer. 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:06:16
Full Impact Statement Template | 16 Other proposed changes  The Taskforce wa s unable to reach a consensus view in relation to establishing an additional public holiday (e.g. for Matariki).  Closedown provisions should be amended to provide greater transparency and certainty for employees. In addition, the requirement that holidays are paid out at 8 per cent and an employee’s anniversary date is reset should be removed (although it should still be possible for anniversary dates to be reset by agreement).  On the sale and transfer of a business, employees should have a choice about wh ether to transfer all of their leave entitlements to the new employer or have them paid out and reset.  Record keeping requirements should be updated to reflect changes to how leave entitlements are held, calculated and paid.  Employers should be required to provide payslips to employees in every pay period.  Issues that cause non -compliance with the current Act should be considered in the design of the compliance and enforcement mechanisms to support any revised Act.  Employers and employees should have the ab ility to agree to arrangements that are different to those in the Act, providing that it can be demonstrated that these arrangements provide the employee with leave entitlements that, at a minimum, meet the standards set out in the Act.  The Taskforce was u nable to reach a consensus view in relation to establishing an additional public holiday (e.g. for Matariki).  Closedown provisions should be amended to provide greater transparency and certainty for employees. In addition, the requirement that holidays are paid out at 8 per cent and an employee’s anniversary date is reset should be removed (although it should still be possible for anniversary dates to be reset by agreement).  On the sale and transfer of a business, employees should have a choice about wheth er to transfer all of their leave entitlements to the new employer or have them paid out and reset.  Record keeping requirements should be updated to reflect changes to how leave entitlements are held, calculated and paid.  Employers should be required to provide payslips to employees in every pay period.  Issues that cause non -compliance with the current Act should be considered in the design of the compliance and enforcement mechanisms to support any revised Act.  Employers and employees should have the abili ty to agree to arrangements that are different to those in the Act, providing that it can be demonstrated that these arrangements provide the employee with leave entitlements that, at a minimum, meet the standards set out in the Act.
Full Impact Statement Template | 17 c. “sick leave to assist employees who are unable to attend work because they are sick or injured, or because someone who depends on the employe e for care is sick or injured” d. “bereavement leave to assist employees who are unable to attend work because they have suffered a bereavement” e. “domestic violence leave to assist employees to deal with the effects on the employees of being people affected by domestic violence” b. It provides clarity and certainty for employers and employees so that employees receive their correct entitlements A major problem identified with the current Act is the difficulty in clearly understanding and expressing entitlements, s o an improved Act should be easier to understand and align more with how employers and employees expect the Act to operate. c. It is simpler than the current Act in relation to provisions of, and payment for, entitlements to holidays and leave The complexity of the current Act creates issues for employers and employees, so a more simple Act should make it easier to implement. d. It is readily implementable in a payroll system Many employers use automated payroll software for the majority of their payroll needs, so the Act should be easily able to be translated into a software system. This would likely involve reducing the number of manual decisions that employers currently need to make about their employees’ entitlements. e. It minimises perverse incentives on emplo yers and employees An improved Act should not incentivise employees to take leave on particular days and not others or incentivise employers to arrange rosters in a particular way to minimise entitlements for their employees. f. It ensures the balance of deci sion-making between employers and employees when it comes to requests for holidays and leave is appropriately calibrated An improved Act would ideally not give one party greater bargaining power in relation to the taking of leave, wherever possible. g. It is readily applicable to the full range of working and remuneration arrangements in the labour market both now and in the future An improved Act should be ‘future -proofed’ and should apply equally to more traditional working arrangements, as well as being fle xible enough to apply to the types of working arrangements that could exist in the future. h. It aims to protect overall entitlements for employees An improved Act should, as much as possible, ensure that employees receive at least their current minimum entitlements (four weeks of annual holidays per year, up to 11 public holidays, five days of sick leave, up to three days of bereavem ent leave per bereavement, and ten days of domestic violence leave). The majority of the criteria do not conflict with one another. However, there appears to be some trade -off between simplicity and protecting overall entitlements for employees (criteria c and h). Under the current Act, annual holidays entitlements are in weeks and a ‘week’ needs to reflect the work pattern a t the time the leave is taken. For example, if an employee was 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:06:16
Full Impact Statement Template | 18 previously working 20 hours a week but recently increased their hours to 40 a week, a ‘week’ for them would be 40 hours. Under an hours -based accrual system, however, an employee would build up a bank of leave in hour s and this does not need to be converted into a week as part of annual holidays calculations (i.e. they determine how many hours they want off and deduct that from their balance) . The tension between simplicity and protecting overa ll entitlements for employees arises when comparing an accrual -based system with the current Act or with Option One . Some e mployees could be worse off under an accrual approach if they increase their hours , as they would have accrued leave based on what they have worked and it would not be converted to match their current working pattern . These employees would miss out on annual holidays (i.e. time off) and payments compared to the status quo they would never be able to claw b ack. However, it should be noted that employee s would be better off compared to the current Act if they have recently reduced their hours as they would have more in the ‘bank’ . In essence, some options may be significantly simpler and meet all other criter ia, but may have impacts on some employees ’ annual holidays entitlements under certain circumstances .
Full Impact Statement Template | 19 Section 4: Impact Analysis Table 2 – Marginal impact: How does each of the options identified in section 3.1 compare with taking no action under each of the criteria set out in section 3.2?
Full Impact Statement Template | 2  making changes to the Act that provide greater prescription as recommended by the Holidays Act Taskforce, if retaining the current units of entitlement and protecting employees’ entitlements are prioritised (Option One)  adopting the majority of the Holidays Act Taskforce proposals but introducing a new system where annual holidays are accrued over time, if simplicity for employe rs and employees is prioritised (O ption Two). Both options provide greater clarity and certainty and will help to ensure that employees receive their correct entitlements and payments for them . They are also implementable in a payroll system , promote the current objectives of the Act, and are applicable to the full range of working and remuneration arrangements in the labour ma rket. The related Cabinet paper is likely to seek agreement to Option One. Section B : Summary Impacts: Benefits and costs Who are the main expected beneficiaries and what is the nature of the expected benefit? The main beneficiaries of changing the Act would be employees and employers. For employees, they would be more likely to receive their correct entitlements and payments, have earlier and greater access to some forms of leave, and may benefit financially from the introduction of new payment methodol ogy. For employers, they would have greater clarity and certainty regarding their obligations and an ability to better systematise rules relating to annual holidays and leave. This should help to reduce costly remediation issues that have occurred as a res ult of ambiguities with the current Act. All employers and employees would benefit from legislation that provi des greater certainty. However, e mployees with variable working and pay arrangements would benefit the most as they are the ones most likely to c urrently receive incorrect entitlements and payments. Similarly, organisations that employ these types of workers would also significantly benefit from greater prescription in how to calculate entitlements and payments for employees with more complex worki ng and payment arrangements .
Full Impact Statement Template | 20 specific days); minimises incentives for employers to arrange rosters in certain ways (except permanent arrangements to minimise public holidays costs) specific days); minimises incentives f or employers to arrange rosters in certain ways (except permanent arrangements to minimise public holidays costs) Balance of decision - making between employers and employees 0 + Retains existing approach where annual holidays is ‘by agreement’, but formalises the widespread practise of employers’ agreeing to the use of annual holidays during the first year of employment by explicitly allowing leave to be taken in advance on a pro -rata basis; making sick, bereavement and family violence leave availabl e from day one removes the need for employers to agree for employees to take leave in the first six months + Retains existing approach where annual holidays is ‘by agreement’, but employees have the right to take the annual holidays that they have accrued ; making sick, bereavement and family violence leave available from day one removes the need for employers to agree for employees to take leave in the first six months Applicable to diverse working arrangements 0 + Prescribed rules apply to diverse working arrangements , but annual holidays provisions may not be as future proofed as Option Two due to a rigid and complex approach ++ Prescribed rules apply to diverse working arrangements ; annual holidays provisions more easily applied to all types of working arrangements when compared to Option One Aims to protect employee entitlements 0 ++ Vast majority of employees better off + Most employees better off, except those who increase their hours and want to take annual holidays soon after Overall assessment 0 Preferred option if protecting employees’ entitlements is prioritised Preferred option simplicity is prioritised
Full Impact Statement Template | 21 Section 5: Conclusions 5.1 What option, or combination of options is likely to best address the problem, meet the policy objectives and deliver the highest net benefits? MBIE recommends making changes to the Act that provide greater prescription as recommended by the Holidays Act T askforce, if retaining the current units of entitlement and protecting employees’ entitlements are prioritised (O ption One). This approach keeps annual holidays entitlements in weeks and retains the requirement that a ‘week’ must reflect the current workin g pattern, thereby largely protecting employees’ annual holidays entitlements when compared to the status quo . It should also have less of an impact on payroll systems as it seeks to improve, rather than fundamentally change, holidays and leave entitlements. Alternatively , MBIE recommends adopting the majority of the Holidays Act Taskforce proposals but introducing a new system where annual holidays are accrued over time, if simplicity for employers and employees is prioritised (O ption Two). An hours -based accrual system for annual holidays makes it significantly easier to calculate entitlements and removes the need for complicated pay -as-you-go provisions . This should make it easier for employees to understand their entitlements and reduce compliance costs for employers . More generally, b oth options provide greater clarity and certainty and will ensure that employees receive their correct entitlements and payments for them. This should help to eliminate remediation issues and the need for cos tly payroll investigations and arrears payments. Both options are also implementable in a payroll system, promote the current objectives of the Act, and are applicable to the full range of working and remuneration arrangements in the labour mar ket. These r ecommendations need to be viewed in light of data and consultation limitations. As previously outlined, while MBIE has confidence in the assumptions and evidence on the type of employees that are likely to be impacted and how, a lack of data on the annual holidays and leave system and the purpose of the payroll testing make it difficult to estimate fiscal impacts at the New Zealand level. With regards to consultation, the Taskforce only publicly consulted on an issues paper and with a small group of payroll providers on a subset of draft recommendations. MBIE intends to conduct further consultation on detailed policy and implementation issues with relevant stakeholders after Cabinet agreement. The consultation that has taken place to date indicates t hat there will be a mixed response to the Taskforce’s recommendations ( Option One). While it has the support of key stakeholders, such as Business New Zealand and the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions, it is expected that others (particularly some payrol l providers and employers) would see th em as overly complex and would prefer an accrual -based opt ion more in line with Option Two . On the other hand, it is expected that most unions will oppose Option Two as some employees could be worse off when compared to the status quo .
Full Impact Statement Template | 22 5.2 Table 3: Summary of costs and benefits of Option One
Full Impact Statement Template | 23
Full Impact Statement Template | 24 increase on average by 0.32% for the sample tested . This i s largely due to entitlements being held and paid in ‘weeks’, the ‘greater of three’ approach to payment calculations and the new ‘g ross earnings’ definition .  Employees with variable hours and/or pay are most likely to be impacted . It is estimated that approximately 60,600 and 580,400 employees , or between three and 27 per cent of all New Zealand employees , work variable hours or receive variable pay. These employees are primarily from the ‘health care and social assistance’, ‘accommodation and food services’ and ‘public administration and safety’ sectors .  Most employees’ annual holidays pay is unchanged . The majority of employees should not see increased payments when compared to the current Act. Around 55 per cent of the employees included in the payroll testing did not receive an increase in pay. However, there could be a marginal change for those employee s that are not currently receiving their correct entitlements or payments.  A small number of employees could be disadvantaged . Workers who take annual holidays immediately after a period in which their average hours over the last four weeks are higher than their average hours over the last 13 weeks could be worse off, relative to the status quo. Table 4 provides an overview of the results of the payroll testing.
Full Impact Statement Template | 25 The percentages set out in the table above need to be treated with caution as they are not directly applicable to the wider New Zealand working population. The percentages represent the portion of employees from the testing dataset who would be impacted by the Taskforce’s proposals. By design , however, the testing dataset includes a large overrepresentation of employees with varied and unpredictable working arrangements as these employees are most likely to not be receiving the correct entitlements now and because it is important to capture as many varied working arrangements and leave scenarios as possible. Therefore, the 10 per ce nt figure of employees from the testing dataset who would be negative impacted is almost certainly a significant overstatement of the percentage of New Zealand employees who would actually be negatively impacted. Similarly, the dollar figures in the table should be treated with caution as they are based on salaries of employees in the testing dataset rather than average salaries from across the New Zealand economy. Using the payroll testing data, it is estimated that annual holidays payments could increase across the New Zealand economy by up to $29.7 million per year. However, in light of the caveats mentioned above, MBIE considers that this is a n overestimation . Option Two – Impacts of an accrual -based annual holidays system As detailed in section 3.1, th e alternative option for annual holidays is an accrual -based system where entitlements are calculated, taken , paid and held in hours. Payment would be based on the greater of:  Ordinary Leave Pay (base rate plus any scheduled overtime, allowance, commission and incentive payments)  Average Leave Pay 13 (average hourly rate in the last 13 weeks multiplied by the amount of leave being taken in hours)  Average Leave Pay 52 (average hourly rate in the last 52 weeks multiplied by the amount of leave being taken in hours) As with Option One, these proposals reflect an improvement on the current annual holidays provisions. They provide clear rules for how to calculate entitlements and payments , give employees the ability to take leave as they earn it , and minimise incentives for employees to take holidays on particular days (i.e. payments and deductions are well -calibrated) or for employers to arrange rosters in particular ways . It is also simpler than the current Act in respect to the hours -based accr ual system for annual holidays and the removal of complex pay -as-you-go provisions. Payroll testing indicates that many employees would not be negatively impacted or would better off under Option Two when compared to the status quo . Employees with stable hours and pay, have recently decreased their hours, or work variable hours and take leave during quieter periods would be better off than under the current Act. However, those who have recently increased their hours or work variable hours and take leave du ring busy periods would be worse off than under the current Act. For example, if an employee has recently increased their hours permanently and wishes to take annual holidays , they would not have accrued as much leave as they would currently be entitled to . These employees would miss out on annual holidays (i.e. time off) and payments compared to the status quo they would never be able to claw back . Conversely, if they took annual holidays shortly after permanently decreasing their 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:06:16
Full Impact Statement Template | 26 hours , they would likely have accrued more leave than they would have been entitled to under the current Act. Employees could also be slightly disadvantaged if they were to leave within the first 12 months of employment. Under the current Act, employees receive their annual holid ays entitlement after 12 months and if they leave before this time they get paid 8% of their gross earnings in lieu of annual holidays (unless they have taken them in advance) . Under Option Two, they would be paid what they had accrued at 7.69%, so c ould be slightly financially worse off. It is estimated that Option Two could impact between 60,600 and 580,400 employees , or three to 27 per cent of all New Zealand employees . These would typically be those working highly variable hours in the ‘health care and social assistance’, ‘accommodation and food services’ and ‘public administration and safety’ sectors . The Taskforce eliminated an accrual -based approach to annual holidays as an option part way through payroll testing because it could leave a small number of employees worse off when compared to the status quo . As a result, it was only tested against an early payment methodology that predates the payment calculations provided in this analysis or the Taskforce’s final recommended payment c alculations. MBIE h as not had the time to conduct this additional payroll testing. However, as t he majority of payroll systems already calculate a nnual holidays based on an accrual system, it is expected that there not be a large cost to the payroll sector to implement this option . Impacts of other recommendations The Taskforce made a number of additional main recommendations that are common to both options one and two . The estimated impacts of these recommendations are provided below. Payment calculations for other forms of leave Under the curr ent Act, payment for family violence leave, bereavement leave, alternative holidays, public holidays and sick leave (FBAPS leave) is calculated using relevant daily pay or average daily pay. Relevant daily pay is what an employee would have received if they were at work on that day, and includes payments such as regular (taxable) allowances, productivity or incentive -based payments and overtime payments if the employee would have received them on the relevant day. If it is not possible t o calculate relevant daily pay or the employee’s daily pay varies within the pay period, an employer can use average daily pay. This is the daily average of an employee’s gross earnings over the previous 52 weeks. The Taskforce recommended that each day (o r part -day) of FBAPS leave should be paid based on the greater of:  Ordinary Leave Pay (base rate plus any scheduled overtime, allowance, commission and incentive payments)  Average Daily Pay (average hourly rate multiplied by the amount of leave being taken in hours). This m ethodology is more prescriptive and can be implemented in payroll systems . It also removes the need for some employers to decide which payment calculation to 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:06:16
Full Impact Statement Template | 27 adopt, which can be a source of confusion or could be done in a way to financial ly advantage the employer . The p ayroll testing suggest s that:  No employees would be worse off . When compared to the current Act, no employee would be worse off under the FBAPS payment methodology.  Most employee s would be better off . While some employees would not see a change in their FBAPS leave pay (28%), results show that the majority (72%) would receive more under the Taskforce’s proposals than when compared to the status quo. The average daily FBAPS leave payment increased by 7. 1 per cent. As with the testing for annual holidays payments, the results need to be treated with caution as they are not directly applicable to the wider New Zealand working population. Therefore, it is expected that the proportion of employees that are p aid more than the status quo and the average size of the increase is an overestimation. Using the payroll testing data, it is estimated that FBAPS payments could increase across the New Zealand economy by up to $487.8 million per year. However, in light o f the caveats mentioned above, MBIE considers that this is an overestimation and provides a maximum estimate for a range . A more reasonable estimate is $186.7 million per year. This assumes that the increase in FBAPS leave payments is largely confined to w orkers with variable hours and/or pay. Removing the ‘parental leave override’ Section 42 of the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act 1987 overrides section 21 of the Holidays Act 2003, so that employees who became entitled to annual holidays while they were on parental leave or in the 12 months after returning to work are paid differently. These employees are only entitled to be paid at a rate based on the average weekly earnings over the last 12 months, rather than the gr eater of this amount and th eir Ordinary Weekly Pay. Because the employee’s average weekly earnings during parental leave will be $0, and parental leave periods can be up to 52 weeks long, this means that some employees are entitled to be paid $0 per week for annual holidays when the y return from parental leave. Removing section 42(2) of the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act 1987 would mean that em ployees who take leave after returning from parental leave are paid at their full rate (greater of Ordinary Weekly Pay and their average weekly earnings over the last 12 months), removing discrimination issues. It also simplifies payroll complexity and aligns with broader Government goals of supporting families and working parents. However, it could lead to behavioural change, such as employers becoming more reluctant to employ parents (despite being in breach of legislation ), and may disadvantage employers if employees resign immediately after 12 months of parental leave and are paid at their full rate for the annual holidays entit lement. It would also likely increase costs for employers. It is d ifficult to estimate the marginal cost of removing the override due to lack of data on the status quo . For example, there is limited information on the duration of parental leave (paid and u npaid), how many employees return to work following parental leave , and whether they return full - or part -time. We also do not know how much these types of 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:06:16
Full Impact Statement Template | 28 employees earn and how they use annual holidays once they return to work (e.g. do they wait until th eir annual holidays are worth more before using them or take them earlier when they are needed ). In light of these caveats, a range of estimates have been calculated:  A low estimate would be a negligible marginal increase for employers across New Zealand . This assumes that employees currently returning to work wait until their annual holidays are worth their full rate or close to their full rate .  A mid -range estimate would be approximately $42 million per year for employers across New Zealand . This estimat e tries to account for some employees not returning to work, and for those that do, returning at reduced hours . It also assumes that returning employees are earning the average wage and only take half of their annual holidays entitlement at a reduced rate.  A high-range estimate would be approximately $137.7 million per year for employers across New Zealand . This assumes that all employees return to work but at reduced hours, are earning the average wage, and wish to take all of their entitled leave immediat ely upon return . MBIE considers that the mid-range estimate is likely to be the most accurate, although these calculations are based on limited data and a number of assumptions and are only provided to give a sense of possible marginal costs . Availability of bereavement, sick and family violence leave Under the Act, all employees are entitled to five days’ paid sick leave a year, 10 days’ family violence leave a year and bereavement leave of either three days or one day per bereavement depending on the nat ure of the relationship with the deceased. Although an employer and employee can agree to take sick leave, family violence leave or bereavement leave in advance, there is no obligation on the employer to provide them before six months’ employment. The Taskforce recommended that eligible employees should be entitled to bereavement leave and family violence leave from the first day of employment. It recommended that eligible employees should be entitled to one day of sick leave from their first day of employment, with an additional day per month of employment until the full entitlement of five days is reached after four months (the entitlement of five days for the second and subsequent years of employment should apply from the anniversary of their employme nt). This recommendation provides a number of benefits. Employees have little control over when they may need these forms of leave, and would benefit by having protections in place in the first six months. Other workers, such as those who frequently change jobs or work for a business which has been sold, are also disadvantaged by not having immediate access to leave. It also aligns with the purpose of the Act and encourages employees to stay home when sick. The gradual increase of sick leave over the first four months may be more difficult for employees to understand and for employers to implement than the status quo. However, this approach tries to balance the needs of employees to take sick leave within the first six months and increased costs to employers . 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:06:16
Full Impact Statement Template | 29 It is estimated that m aking bereavement, sick and family violence leave available from day one will increase costs across the New Zealand economy by $ 51.9 million per year. This figure accounts for tenure and turnover rates in New Zealand and is based on assumptions on the amount of leave likely to be taken within the first six months of employment . Eligibility fo r bereavement, sick and family violence leave An employee is currently eligible for bereavement, sick and family violence leave if:  they have six months’ current continuous employment with the same employer, or  they have worked for the employer for six months for an average of 10 hours per week, and at least one hour in every week, or 40 hours in every month. In light of the Taskforce’s recomme ndation that these forms of leave are available from the first day of employment, it proposed a new eligibility test:  All employees with agreed hours and an expectation of continuous employment should be eligible for family violence leave and bereavement l eave from the first day of employment.  All employees with agreed hours and an expectation of continuous employment should be eligible for sick leave from the first day of employment. Sick leave days should build up from one day on the first day of employme nt to a full entitlement of 5 days after 4 months.  ‘Agreed hours’ refers to the hours that the employer and employee have agreed that the employee will work, as outlined in the employment agreement. ‘Expectations of continuous employment’ refers to the exp ectation that the employee will not have any periods of unpaid leave that are longer than one week.  Employees with no agreed hours or who are not expected to work continuously should be subject to an ‘hours test’ applied after 13 weeks. This test requires that the employee works on average at least 10 hours a week over the preceding 13 weeks. If the employee meets this threshold, they become eligible for sick leave, family violence leave and bereavement leave. If they d o not meet this test, it is repeated a fter 13 weeks to see if they meet the hours requirement or have been working continuously.  All employees should be eligible for sick leave, family violence leave and bereavement leave after six months of continuous employment. This proposal provides clarity for employers and employees and should be relatively straightforward for the majority of employees. While it will remain somewhat complex for variable workers, it should not be any more so than the status quo. As it is analog ous to the current eligibility requirements and likely to apply to a similar number of employees, it is anticipated that it would not increase costs . Pay-as-you-go annual holidays Under the current Act, employers can regularly pay annual holiday pay with a n employee’s pay if the employee works on a basis that is so intermittent or irregular that it is impracticable for the employer to provide the employee with four weeks’ annual 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:06:16
Full Impact Statement Template | 3 Due to data limitations, it is not possible to provide an estimate of the total marginal cost of Option Two. However, it is estimated that the total ma rginal cost of Option One could be up to $310.3 million per year. This is comprised of increased costs for the following proposed changes:  A new annual holidays payment methodology ($29.7 million per year ).  A new payment methodology for other types of leave ($186.7 million per year).  Changing how annual holidays payments are calculated for employees returning from parental leave ($42 million per year ).  Bereavement, sick and family violence leave being available to employees from day one ($51.9 million per year ). There are also likely to be some costs for employers to transition to a new or updated payroll system. Amendments to the Act would require a number of changes to payroll systems and i t is unclear how much this could cost individual employers or New Zealand more generally . MBIE intends to work with payroll providers and employers during implementation to assist with the transition .
Full Impact Statement Template | 30 holidays. Also known as pay -as-you-go (PAYG) , this type of arrangement must be specified in an employment agreement at a rate of not less than eight per cent. The Taskforce recommended that PAYG should not be available to employees on fixed - term contracts of less than 12 months and a more detailed definition should be provided for wh en PAYG can be used because a work pattern is ‘intermittent or irregular’. It also developed a range of enabling parameters to support the new ‘intermittent or irregular’ definition, such as a recurring 13 week review period. The Taskforce’s proposals prov ide clarity as to what ‘intermittent or irregular’ and should reduce the incidence of some employees incorrectly receiving PAYG as opposed to annual holidays. However, it could incentivise employers to offer more or less casual work or to structure work to fit the defined thresholds. The Taskforce intentionally sought to increase the general threshold of eligibility for PAYG, and it is likely that the proposed provisions would reduce the number receiving PAYG. The introduction of a review period may increas e compliance costs for employers, but it is estimated that the overall costs of the Taskforce’s PAYG recommendations would be negligible. Even if the percentage of employees receiving PAYG alters , the costs should be the same as an 8% loading on top of emp loyees’ earnings and four weeks’ paid annual holidays are equivalent. Taking sick leave and family violence leave in smaller units The Act considers sick leave and family violence leave in days and does not explicitly allow for these types of leave to be t aken in units of less than a day. Although many employers allow their employees to take sick and family violence leave in part days, it is possible than an employee could be deducted a full day’s leave when they were only away for a few hours. The Taskfor ce recommended that employees should have the ability to take sick leave and family violence leave in units of less than a day on a proportionate basis for time and pay with a minimum amount of a quarter of a day. This would provide greater clarity on the matter of partial sick and family violence leave, protect employees’ entitlements, and ensure that the usage and deduction of sick and family violence leave entitlements would more closely align. However, it may increase payroll complexity and lead to inc reased costs for employers that:  currently treat part sick leave and family violence leave days as whole days ; and  have employee s that use their full entitlement and need more time off ; and  require employees who have used their full entitlement to take annual or unpaid leave . MBIE considers that very few employees would use their full family violence leave entitlements as a result of not being granted part days and needing to take unpaid leave each year. While this number would be higher for sick leave, it is not possible to provide an estimate of increased costs. It is expected that the fiscal impacts would likely be negligible at the New Zealand economy level.
Full Impact Statement Template | 31 Otherwise working day test Section 12(3) of the Act provides a list of factors to be taken into account by the employer and employee when determining whether a day is an Otherwise Working Day for FBAPS purposes. However, as these factors are not ranked and there is no guidance about the weighting that should be attached to each factor, there are often difficulties determining whether an employee is eligible or not for a day of FBAPS leave. The Taskforce recommended that a day should be considered an Otherwise Working Day for an employee for FBAPS purposes if:  the employee was expected to work on the day in question according to a work pattern that has previously been agreed between the employee and employer, or  the employee has worked on 50% or more of the corresponding days in either the previous 4 weeks or the previous 13 weeks. This approach pr ovides prescription and certainty as to whether a particular calendar day is an Otherwise Working Day for an employee , ensuring that employees receive their correct entitlements. However, although it minimises incentives for employers to make short -term ch anges to rosters in order to avoid obligations, it does not remove the incentive to set permanent working arrangements in a way that reduces costs relating to public holidays. For example, MBIE has received feedback from a number of workers that their empl oyers have placed them on a Tuesday to Saturday roster in order to avoid having to pay them for the public holidays that fall on a Monday. It is possible that more employees will receive FBAPS leave than under the current Act, although it could be argued that these employees should already be receiving them. It is expected that the new Otherwise Working Day test will result in a negligible marginal cost. New bereavement leave definition Employees can take three days’ bereavement leave on the death of their partner, parent, child, sibling, grandparent, grandchild or partner’s parent. Bereavement leave can be taken at any time and for any purpose relating to the death, and does not have to be taken strai ght away or on consecutive days. A separate provision en ables an employee to take one day’s bereavement leave on the death of any other person. However, this is only on recognition by the employer that the employee has suffered bereavement by taking into account : closeness of relationship; any responsibility for ceremonies around death; and/or cultural responsibilities . The Taskforce recommended that section 69(2)(a) of the Act, regarding people on whose death the employee may take three days of bereavement leave, should be extended to include:  stepfamily  family-by-marriage not already included (siblings -in-law and children -in-law)  cultural family groups (e.g. wh āngai relationships)  aunts, uncles, nieces and nephews  miscarriage. 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:06:16
Full Impact Statement Template | 32 This would recognise the importance of a greater set of relationships and circumsta nces, provide greater certainty to employees about when they can take bereavement leave and better supports the purposes of the Act. It also better support s cultural practices and varied family arrangements. This proposal is likely to have cost implicatio ns for employers. However, it is not possible to estimate the marginal fiscal impact of the extended bereavement leave definition as bereavement leave is not finite , there are no reliable statistics on the number of days currently taken each year, and no r eliable way to estimate how much employees would use after a change in legislation . For comparison purposes, if the number of bereavement leave days taken each year by employees increased on average from half a day to one, costs would increase from $232.3 million a year to $464.6 million a year. Closedown provisions The Act allows employers to have one period per year where they customarily close operations and require employees to use some or all of their annual holiday entitlements. Businesses can have additional closedowns throughout the year if employees agree, but employers cannot require the use of holiday entitlements for these additional closedowns. The Taskforce proposed a number of changes to the Act to provider greater transparency and certainty for employees . It also recommended that the requirements that holidays are paid out at 8% and an employee’s anniversary date must be reset during a closedown should be removed. These recommendations better protect employees’ entitlements, align with the p urpose of the Act and provide greater certainty for employees. As they do not alter the level of entitlement (just whether it is taken as leave or as a lump sum payment), it would not increase costs for employers. Sale and transfer of a business Under the current Act, employees’ outstanding holidays and leave entitlements cannot be transferred from an outgoing employer to a new employer in the event that a business is sold. This is because, in these situations, existing employment agreements come to an end and the Act requires that outstanding annual holidays entitlements are to be paid out. The exception to this requirement is when vulnerable workers are involved and section 69J of Part 6A of the Employment Relations Act 2000 applies. Anecdotally, MBIE is a ware that in many instances these entitlements are in fact transferred from one employer to a new employer. In some cases, this may occur with the agreement of employees while in other cases it may occur without employees being given a choice. The Taskforc e recommended that on the sale and transfer of a business, employees should have a choice about whether to transfer all of their leave entitlements or have them paid out and reset. This benefits employees who have accumulated entitlements and wish to retai n them. For example, if they have carried over 15 days’ paid sick leave in recent years and have accumulated annual holidays in prep aration for an upcoming 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:06:16
Full Impact Statement Template | 33 trip. However, it also p rovides the option to have their annual holidays paid out for those employees that would prefer a lump sum payment. The Taskforce pro posals imply that the employer that is selling would be responsible for paying out entitlements for the employees that wished to reset them , but this is not made explicit . This issue, as wel l as concerns around inheriting incorrect holidays and leave records and liabilities, will be examined as part of the next phase of the Holidays Act Review. This proposal has some potential disadvantages :  The ability for employees to be paid out for accum ulated annual and alternative holidays is contrary to the policy objective of giving employees time away from work.  It is unclear whether it has the potential to lead to behavioural change, such as incoming employers deciding to start fresh with new staff rather than retaining existing employees, offering incentives one way or another, or only offering employment to employees who take a pay out .  It could also have implications for a business’s ability to sell, particularly if a new employer would be inheri ting large leave liabilities and incomplete wage, time and leave records. In light of the Taskforce’s recommendations that annual holidays can be taken in advance on a pro -rata basis and that sick leave, bereavement leave and family violence leave are avai lable from day one, it is expected that this recommendation would not have a significant marginal cost for employers . Record keeping and payslips requirements Under the current Act, employers must keep the information necessary to demonstrate that they hav e complied with minimum entitlement provisions. The Taskforce agreed with this general approach and recommended that record -keeping requirements should be updated to reflect changes to how leave and entitlements are held, calculated and paid. It also recom mended that employers should be required to retain all holiday and leave records for six years and to make these available to employees on request. As there is currently no legal requirement for employers to provide payslips to employees, the Taskforce recommended that employers should be required to provide payslips to employees in every pay period. It was proposed that p ayslips could be in a digital or physical format, but employees should be able to request that their payslip be provided in a specific format. These recommendations help to ensure that employers hold the information needed to calculate pay and leave entitlements, address any queries from employees and support any investigation into correct payment or miscalculation. They also provide a c lear way for employees to have regular access to information regarding their leave entitlements, increase transparency, and allow employees to better understand and track their holidays and leave entitlements. The proposed requirements may necessitate changes to payroll systems and result in direct costs to payroll providers and indirect costs to employers. The payslips requirement may also increase compliance costs for employers. It is unclear how much these recommendations may cost individual employer s or New Zealand more generally, 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:06:16
Full Impact Statement Template | 34 but MBIE intends to work with payroll providers and employers during implementation to assist with the transition. 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:06:16
Full Impact Statement Template | 35 Section 6: Implementation and operation 6.1 How will the new arrangements work in practice? The implementation of options one or two would require le gislative change via a Holidays Amendment Bill. It is anticipated that a n amended Act would come into effect 12 to 18 months after royal assent in order to provide payroll providers the time to develop n ew systems and for employers to adopt them. Transitional provisions would likely be needed, and although the details of these still need to be worked through , it is expected that they would be relatively complex and detailed in order to minimise costs and unintentional non - compliance for employers . The Better Rules approach would be used in the drafting process in order to help develop the detailed policy and implementation specifications. It involves creating a clear concept model, decision trees and rules statements that can then be translated into both written legislation and computer code. This should result in legislation that is clear and workable for computerised payroll systems. The Better Rules approach seeks to involve important stakeholders into t he process – in this case, it could include employer and employee representatives, payroll providers and Parliamentary Counsel Office. Once implemented, MBIE would be the agency responsible for the legislation. The Labour Inspectorate, as the regulator fo r the employment relations and standards regulatory system, would be responsible for enforcing and monitoring the new arrangements. It is especially important that sufficient s upport is provided to employers, employees and payroll providers during the implementation period . For the Labour Inspectorate, this could include:  increasing its resourcing in order to determine how to operationalise the new requirements , develop new training resources, and enforce the new requirements  engaging with relevant stakeholders (e.g. roadshows with payroll providers and payroll professionals)  updating approximately 90 per cent of the existing guidance and products relating to holidays legislation .
Full Impact Statement Template | 36 Section 7: Monitoring, evaluation and review 7.1 How will the impact of the new arrangements be monitored? MBIE will track the number and types of queries to the MBIE contact centre, the Labour Inspectorate and our websites (business.govt.nz and employment.govt.n z) in relation to the Holidays Act. The number and types of breaches resulting from Labour Inspectorate activities, as well as Employment Relations Authority and Employment Court cases, will also be monitored. The details of the monitoring and evaluation f ramework will be developed by MBIE as part of the next phase of work.
Full Impact Statement Template | 4 As part of the regulatory analysis, MBIE developed estimates of the number of emp loyees impacted by the proposed changes to the Act and which sectors could be most impacted. The estimate for the number of employees with variable working pat terns and/or pay, and considered a proxy for those most likely impacted by options one and two, was based on2:  the number of employees with no usual working p attern (60,600)  the number of employees that work shifts that vary (226,700)  the number of employees that worked paid overtime at a higher rate in the last four weeks (277,800)  the number of employees who do not usually work standard hours (580,4003). These figures only provide an indication of how many employees may see a change in their holidays and leave payments as a result o f options one and two. As proxies have been used, the actual number that may be impacted could differ. Estimated fiscal impacts have also been developed for a number of Taskforce proposals. Calculations have used a number of estimates and assumptions, such as estimated number of employees and average weekly earnings, so are intended to provide a broad indication of possible costs.
Full Impact Statement Template | 5 Impact Statement : Improving the Holidays Act 2003
Full Impact Statement Template | 6  Estimated fiscal impacts have also been develo ped for a number of Taskforce proposals. Calculations have used a number of estimates and assumptions, such as estimated number of employees and average weekly earnings, so are intended to provide a broad indication of possible costs. 1.3 Responsible Ma nager (signature and date): Gerard Clark Employment Standards Policy team Labour and Immigration Policy branch Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment
Full Impact Statement Template | 7 Section 2: Problem definition and objectives 2.1 What is the current state within which action is proposed? The Act sets out the minimum entitlements to holidays and leave, and payment for them, that employers are obliged to provide to their employees. Its purpose is to promote balance between work and other aspects of employees’ lives by providing minimum entitlements to annual holidays and other types of leave. It is estimated that there are 153,100 employers and 2, 166,200 employees in New Zealand4. Under the Act, all employees are entitled to:  A minimum of four weeks ’ paid annual holidays after each 12 months of continuous employment for their employer. Employees can be paid annual holidays on a ‘pay -as-you-go’ basis if they are on a fixed -term agreement of less than 12 months or work so intermittently or i rregularly that it is impractical for the employer to provide them with four weeks’ annual holidays .  Up to 11 public holidays each year, if they are days they would otherwise work.  An alternative holiday, if they are required to work (or are on call and th is impacts on their day ) on a public holiday that is an otherwise working day .  Access to five days’ paid sick leave a year , 10 days’ paid domestic violence leave a year , and up to 3 days of paid bereavement leave per bereavement:  after six months of current contin uous employment with the same employer, or  after working for the employer for six months for an average of 10 hours per week, and at least one hour in every week, or 40 hours in every month. Annual holidays are paid at whichever rate is the higher of the employee’s ordinary weekly pay (or if this is not possible to calculate, the average weekly ea rnings in the last four weeks) and the employee’s average weekly earnings in the last 12 months. Sick leave, bereavement leave , family violence leav e and public holidays are paid at the rate of relevant daily pay, or average daily pay if it is not possible to calculate relevant daily pay or the employee’s daily pay varies within the pay period . The Act also covers a number of other issues . These include annual closedowns for businesses, transferring of public holidays and ‘cashing up’ one week’s holiday. While an employment agreement cannot provide less leave than is required under the Act, it can provide more, and many employers do in fact set their employee entitlements at levels above the minimum standards set out in the Act. Analysis of collective agreements, for example, indicates that 70 per cent of employees have more annual holidays than the statutory minimum and 43 per cent are entitled to 10 days’ sick leave in their first year of employment5.
Full Impact Statement Template | 8 2.2 What regulatory system (s) are already in place? Annual holidays and leave is part of the wider employment relations and employment standards regulatory system. The purpose of this system is to promote employment relationships that are productive, flexible and to the benefit of employers and employees. The core statutory requirements relating to holidays and leave are provided in the Holidays Act 2003. The Act is based on prevailing societ al views about just treatment and acknowledge s that conditions can arise in labour markets where asymmetries of power and information can exist between employers and employees. The Act is supported by online tools and guides, a contact centre and problem resolution services established under employment relations statute . These include:  Mediation Services , where an independent mediator seeks to help an employee and an employer resolve an employment relationship problem in a semi -formal and con fidential environment.  The Employment Relations Authority , an independent body established to consider the facts of an employment relationship problem and make a decision based on the merits of the case.  The Employment Court , which hears and determines ca ses relating to employment disputes, including challenges to determinations of the Employment Relations Authority, questions of interpretation of law, and disputes over strikes and lockouts.  Labour Inspectors , who monitor and enforce compliance with employ ment standards .
Full Impact Statement Template | 9  Many employees are not receiving their correct entitlements, or payment for their entitlements  Employers and employees do not have certainty regarding the provision of and payment for entitlements  Employers, particularly those with large numbe rs of employees on variable work and pay arrangements, can incur relatively high compliance costs to comply with the Act  The Act cannot be readily systematised in a payroll system  Many employers are carrying a liability that cannot be readily quantified (a nd may change significantly when employees change their work patterns). These challenges with the Act itself, combined with poor implementation in payroll systems and the business processes that support them, have led to widespread non - compliance with the legislation. Since 2016, every employer engaged by the Labour Inspectorate Payroll team has had a form of non -compliance with the Act, ranging from relatively minor record keeping breaches to full-scale non-compliance with the provision and payment of holi days and leave. It has been estimated that between 194,700 and 763,350 employees could be affected by non -compliance in New Zealand6. Non-compliance issues have often led to underpayments to employees. As at June 2019, arrears had been calculated in respec t of 84 of the 155 completed investigations undertaken by the Labour Inspectorate into non -compliance with the Act. In total, around $90.4 million has been paid to 116,000 employee s across numerous organisations. This figure will grow over time – District Health Boards have estimated remediation payments with a cost of $550 -650 million, while the Ministry of Education had $63 million allocated in Budget 2019 for remediation payments. In December 2017, the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety receive d a joint proposal from Business New Zealand and the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions to review the legislation. A Taskforce was established by Cabinet soon after to review the Act and suggest recommendations for change. The tripartite group was compris ed of BusinessNZ, the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions and government representatives (MBIE, the State Services Commission and Inland Revenue) , and was chaired by Professor Gordon Anderson, an employment law specialist from Victoria University. It provi ded the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety with its final report in October 2019 , and proposed an improved status quo where the existing units of entitlement are retained (weeks for annual holidays, days for other forms of leave) and the focus is on addressing known issues with the existing Act. A number of non -legislative initiatives have been implemented in recent years to try and address issues with the Act. In addition to proactive audits and investigations, the Labour Inspectorate has conducte d extensive industry engagement and developed a suite of tools and guides . However, while these efforts have provided greater clarity and support to employers and employees, it is clear that th ey are not sufficient to fully mitigate the problems with the A ct itself . Without legislative intervention, employers will
Full details of NAATI recertification criteria can be found on the NAATI website.
Full details of the scheme are available on the domestic top-up scheme page.
Full members of New Zealand Cycle Trails Incorporated (NZCT Inc)
Full text versions of Conventions
Functional Leader for government procurement and property.
Funded by levies on wages and salaries, with both workers and employers paying an estimated 1.39% each
Funded researchers should follow funder principles and policies with respect to research data management and should be prepared to share data with other researchers through online institutional or subject data repositories whenever they are not restricted by other considerations as described above. Researchers are encouraged to produce a data management plan outlining what data sets their project will generate or process, whether and how these data will be made accessible, how they will be curated, stored, and preserved, and measures taken to safeguard and protect indigenous or other sensitive data.
Funding a dispute resolution scheme
Funding can be used by the RTO to assist with administration costs incurred managing the funding process. It is considered up to 5% is reasonable should RTOs choose to claim these costs. This must be deducted by the RTO from the funding allocated to the event. It is not additional to the allocated funding.
Funding can be used for RTOs to undertake additional promotion of their event or for the RTO to provide to an event organiser (via a third-party contract) to undertake additional promotion of an event.
Funding cannot be used to substitute existing funding for promotional activities.
Funding commercialisation projects from publicly funded research.
Funding for Great Ride trail managers and annual maintenance.
Funding for quality assurance, data and insights, and promotion of the NZCT brand.
Funding for reasonable travel-related expenses, such as insurance cover.
Funding for the 2019/20 summer will be available to local authorities to help manage responsible camping. It will be for operating costs, including education and enforcement projects, ambassador programmes, as well as temporary facilities like showers and toilets
Funding information and opportunities
Funding is for additional event promotion costs only i.e. not to substitute the existing budget (see example in co-funding section)
Funding is for e-bike charging equipment and installation costs only (Note: The fund should not be used for additional facilities associated with the charging station)
Funding is in addition to the $20.2 million in grants that was allocated to RTOs through the Strategic Tourism Assets Protection Programme (STAPP) in 2020/2021.
Funding of a further round of the Tourism Infrastructure Fund. This is to support communities by co-funding infrastructure that is significantly used by visitors to prepare for the return of international tourists.
Funding recipients for the Strategic Tourism Assets Protection Programme
Funding second NAATI tests (if you have failed your first NAATI language test)
Funding to attract more international visitors to regional New Zealand
Funding will be available for one year of data collection with a further six months for both implementation and design, and finalisation (including delivery of data and project report to the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE)). It is anticipated that applicants will commission professional data providers to deliver services, enabling quality data.
Funding will be available for one year of data collection with a further six months for either design/implementation and/or finalisation
Further advice on eligibility for remedies for personal grievances
Further advice on eligibility for remedies for personal grievances [PDF 736KB]
Further consultation in September/October 2022 involved online survey, email submissions and more hui. We heard from:
Further decisions on proposed national IP policy for research and wider incentives for commercialisation.
Further decisions regarding Callaghan Innovation
Further detail about industry policy and the ITP Programme
Further detailed design work will be required to implement the Taskforce’s recommendations in legislation
Further information about GYSS, including eligibility criteria and confirmed speakers, is included below and on their website:
Further information about the Food Secure Communities Programme is available on the Ministry of Social Development website.
Further information about the NESTF and National Environmental Standards more generally can be found on the Ministry for the Environment website.
Further information about the Tourism Futures Taskforce
Further information on Horizon Europe for New Zealand entities
Further information on each area
Further information on the Recognised Seasonal Employer Scheme
Further partnerships will be added to this list over time, including those that are currently under development alongside new opportunities.
Further work is needed to fully develop these proposals and it is expected that further advice on the review proposals will be provided to the new Minister of Immigration in the first half of next year.
Further work responding to the Royal Commission on the Pike River Coal Mine Tragedy included:
Future Services. Leads the Our Future Services programme to deliver a cost-effective immigration system that is productive, effective at managing risk and provides a more seamless experience for our customers and staff. Future Services also leads Continuous Improvement work to improve efficiency, standardise processes and remove waste in our ways of working and support leadership capability and culture.
Future iterations of Going For Growth will be released as your ideas are adopted and as the Government makes progress through its agenda.
Future of Work Tripartite Forum
Future of Work Tripartite Forum meeting 14 November 2022
Future of Work Tripartite Forum meeting 19 September 2022
Future of Work Tripartite Forum meeting 22 March 2021
Future of Work Tripartite Forum meeting 23 March 2020 (cancelled due to COVID-19)
Future of Work Tripartite Forum meeting 23 September 2021
Future of Work Tripartite Forum meeting 26 June 2023
Future of Work Tripartite Forum meeting 27 July 2020
Future of Work Tripartite Forum meeting 27 June 2022
Future of Work Tripartite Forum meeting 28 June 2021
Future of Work Tripartite Forum meeting 28 March 2022
Future of Work Tripartite Forum meeting 3 April 2023
Future of Work Tripartite Forum meeting 8 November 2021
Future of Work Tripartite Forum meeting agenda - 23 March 2020 [PDF 182KB]
Future of the Skilled Migrant Category
Future of work: Status update [PDF 186KB]
Future plans (inclusive of possible funding streams independent of the TDPF) for replicating the proposed initiative are identified. Final reporting requirements will include a report back on efforts identified in proposals.
Future plans are identified for how the proposed data will add-value to the tourism data system and be used to enable better productivity or improved environmental outcomes. Examples might include upcoming strategy or business case development or monitoring for continuous improvement. Examples do not need to be limited to a sub-sector. The extent of impact will be demonstrated by the number of uses identified, as well as the reach of each use.
Future procurement opportunities
Future procurement opportunities (FPO) are posted on the Government Electronic Tender Service (GETS). This gives suppliers early notice of a planned procurement. You can follow an FPO and receive notifications when a related tender is released on GETS.
Future review for the copper pricing framework
GBSI presents important commercial and defence opportunities for New Zealand. However, it could also be used to facilitate activities that may harm our national security or are contrary to our national interests.
GETS award notices historic
GETS product categories historic
GETS region by tender historic
GETS schema and documentation
GETS supplier data historic
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE TO THE REPORT OF THE HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE Proposal
GPS trackers and personal locator beacons.
GST registration certificate or a copy of the online IR GST registration
GYSS 2024 will cover the following during the Summit:
GYSS is a gathering of young scientists and research (35 years old or younger) from all over the world, with a chance to interact with eminent scientists and technology leaders in the multidisciplinary fields of chemistry, physics, medicine, mathematics, computer science and engineering. GYSS provides a platform for conversations on science and research, technology, innovation and solutions to global challenges.
Game Development Sector Rebate scheme
Game development sector rebate
Gap analysis of policies and programmes for a just transition [PDF 412KB]
Gas (Safety and Measurement) Regulations 2010
Gas production forecast to fall below demand
Gathering further information from applicants as necessary:
Gene technology (also known as genetic engineering or genetic modification) has been used in New Zealand for a long time. The updated rules intend to support our scientists in using gene technologies to make advancements in healthcare and climate change, protect our unique environment, lift our agricultural productivity, and boost exports.
Gene technology has the potential to deliver enormous benefits for New Zealand, but we haven't been able to capture these benefits. Like Australia, a regulator will be established to allow New Zealand to access the benefits and manage the risks of these technologies. The regulator will make sure the use of gene technology is safe.
Gene technology is a powerful tool that has the potential to deliver enormous benefits for New Zealand.
Gene technology media pack [DOCX 362KB]
Gene technology regulation
Gene technology regulator
General Funding Agreement contract template - New Zealand - Singapore Leveraging AI for Healthy Agei...
General Manager People and Culture (Policy Owner)
General background to the OSHAA Act 1. With the advent of Rocket Lab (a United States company with a New Zealand subsidiary) conducting space launches from New Zealand, there is a need to mana ge various associated risks to New Zealand , including: • meeting international obligations as set out in international treaties relating to space activities to which New Zealand is party, including liability and insurance , • meeting obligations under the Tec hnology Safeguards Agreement, a treaty level agreement with the United States for managing the transfer of sensitive technology from the U nited States to New Zealand , • manag ing safety risks that arise from space activities , and • ensuring that space activit ies conducted in New Zealand (and by New Zealanders offshore) are consistent with New Zealand’s national interests, including national security. 2. Although rockets , their launches and high -altitude vehicles (HAV s) are to some extent regulated by Civil Aviati on Act Part 101, New Zealand has no comprehensive regulatory regime designed for space launches . Therefore, there is limited scope to prevent anyone from launching space or high -altitude objects or to manage the operation . 3. The OSHAA Act establishes a regulatory regime to ensure that New Zealand can meet its international obligations and m anage the risks associated with space and high -altitude activities. 4. When the OSHAA Act comes into force, licenses and/or permits will be required for the following act ivities: • Launching a launch vehicle(e.g. a rocket) into outer space from New Zealand , • Launching and operating a payload (e.g. a satellite) from New Zealand , • Launching a HAV from New Zealand (such vehicles operate above controlled air space but do not reac h outer space) , • Operating a launch facility in New Zealand , and • Launching a launch vehicle or payload by a New Zealand national overseas (a requirement of New Zealand’s international obligations). 5. MBIE will administer the licensing regime and undertake s pace policy functions. The Minister for Economic Development will a ct on advice from MBIE and relevant agencies to determine whether to grant licenses and permits . 6. A number of threshold tests ap ply to the grant ing of a license or permit (depending on the provisions of the OSHAA Act ), such as : • Applicants must be technically capable of undertaking the proposed mission • Applicants must demonstrate how they will manage public safety • Applicants must demonstrate how they will mitigate orbital debris 6
General enquiries, feedback and complaints
Geneva Conventions Act 1958
Geographical Indications (Wine and Spirits) Registration Act 2006 review
Geology, biology, chemistry, physics for bachelor and then on to a Masters degree
Geothermal energy generation
Get in touch with us if you would like more information or have a question.
Getting people into employment and lifting economic outcomes.
Give wildlife space, for example if encountering seals or sea lions, keep a distance of at least 20 metres.
Given the magnitude of the emergency response and the widespread damage to buildings, MBIE wanted to understand how well the rapid building assessment system functioned during the response and to identify any areas for improvement.
Given this existing work, the Tourism ITP took the taken the opportunity to take a phased approach and focus energy on targeted actions required to deliver systemic change, rather than producing another stocktake of issues and challenges for the industry.
Global Challenges and Industrial Competitiveness: Addresses societal challenges and promotes industrial competitiveness.
Global Impact Visa evaluation: Implementation and early outcomes - year one report [PDF 14MB]
Global Impact Visa evaluation: Integration and early outcomes - year two report [PDF 1.9MB]
Global Impact Visa evaluation: year three final report [PDF 2.8MB]
Global Young Scientists Summit
Global Youth Scientists Summit
Global circularity hubs, networks and alliances are on the rise
Global impact visa evaluation reports
Glossary and common abbreviations
Glossary of commonly used trade terms
Glossary of dispute resolution terms
GoBusiness and GoManufacturing make it easier for small businesses and the manufacturing sector in New Zealand to access the tools, advice, and resources they need to grow, export, and reach their full potential. By packaging content from across government and the private sector, these websites provide simple, clear, and practical information designed with small businesses and manufacturers in mind.
Going For Growth sets out 5 pillars driving the push for economic growth:
Going For Growth sets out steps to ensure regulatory settings:
Going For Growth sets out steps to:
Going For Growth: supermarkets on notice
Golden Bay Emergency Communications Services Charitable Trust
Good governance practice in the public sector
Good ways to get started are:
Gordon Anderson Holidays Act Taskforce Chair
Gordon Anderson Holidays Act Taskforce Chair 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
Governance is a key lever to ensure regulatory systems are clear about what they set out to achieve, how they go about achieving it, and monitoring results. The right people at the governance table can bring all the parts of a system together to ensure that the system is learning and adapting, rather than taking a 'set and forget' approach. Good governance can help with response to critical issues (such as Covid 19 lockdowns), adaptation to changes in our uncertain environment, and ensuring delivery minimises compliance costs while maximising societal benefits.
Government Centre for Dispute Resolution
Government Electronic Tenders Service
Government Investment in Decarbonising Industry
Government Procurement Rules
Government Procurement Rules consultation
Government Property Group
Government Property Group (GPG).
Government Property Group website
Government agencies are working with the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) and the Department of Internal Affairs (DIA) on the comprehensive LAS work programme to transform the way in which New Zealand public sector agencies provide language assistance services to non-English speaking clients.
Government agencies need to identify opportunities to improve information for victims of exploitation and other vulnerable groups.
Government agencies that need a large volume of translation services may find our draft Transition Plan useful as a basis for preparing their own plan.
Government and local communities co-fund the Great Rides, which provide a healthy and enjoyable way for New Zealanders and international visitors to see the country.
Government briefings and papers
Government confirms next steps for tourism data initiatives
Government entities have stewardship obligations under the State Sector Act to monitor the performance of the regulatory systems they oversee.
Government has a significant programme of work to ensure the building regulatory system is efficient, and to support the building and construction sector to lift performance.
Government has a significant programme of work to support the building and construction sector to lift performance.
Government launches the Former Refugees, Recent Migrants and Ethnic Communities Employment Action Plan
Government performs a number of functions in the resolution of disputes. It:
Government policy statements
Government prescribes daylight disinfectant to modern slavery
Government presentation on next steps for responding to emissions budgets [PDF 468KB]
Government presentations on the current state of the economy and labour market and skills and training [PDF 1.2MB]
Government provides confidence to those seeking an adventure
Government response to the report of the Holidays Act Taskforce [PDF 2MB]
Government's Tourism Snapshot
Government-led connectivity programmes such as the Ultra-Fast Broadband Programme, Rural Broadband Initiative Mobile Black Spot Fund, Rural Capacity Upgrades Programme and Remote Users Scheme are delivering improved broadband and mobile services to New Zealanders.
Graduate students (Masters and Doctoral)
Granny flats building consent exemption on track
Grant Webster, Tourism Holdings Limited (co-Chair)
Grant has been the Chief Executive Officer of Tourism Holdings Limited since 2008. Grant is Chairman of the joint venture businesses Action Manufacturing, Just go Motorhomes and Togo. He is also currently on the Board of Tourism Industry Aotearoa (TIA).
Granting visas to people who New Zealand needs to work, visit, study, or settle here.
Grants for scientific research and associated activities since 2007.
Grants to Regional Tourism Organisations (RTOs)
Grants will be from a minimum of $50,000 to a maximum of $100,000
Great Rides get e-bike upgrade
Greater exposure should generally lead to greater incidence of the effect. However, in some cases, the mere presence of the factor can trigger the effect. In other cases, an inverse proportion is observed: greater exposure leads to lower incidence.
Greater transparency for employees
Green Paper and consultation
Gross earnings (‘GE’): For the purposes of calculating payments for holidays and leave, gross earnings means all payments that the employer is required to pay to the employee under the employee’s employment agreement for the period during which the earni ngs are being assessed (subject to certain exclusions under the Act) (Sections 8, 9A, 10A, 14, 23, 25, 26, 28 and 34 of the Act ).
Ground-based space infrastructure
Ground-based space infrastructure (GBSI) refers to the systems on Earth that interact with spacecraft.
Grounds for objecting to a Category 2 installation are that the person:
Grow regional economies by improving resilience and increasing productivity. (MBIE)
Growing R&D expenditure has benefits for us all, and will enable our innovators, our entrepreneurs and our visionaries to build a better New Zealand.
Growing R&D will fuel innovation, drive economic diversification, and increase productivity.
Growing global food security with digital tools
Growing innovative industries in New Zealand: From the knowledge wave to the digital age
Growing the food and beverage sector
Growing the number of skilled people
Growth in global travel means that some destinations around the world are under pressure from tourism, resulting in overcrowding and negative effects on the quality of the visitor experience, the environment and communities.
Growth in labour productivity
Guidance for Public Service Agencies: Developing DEI Plans
Guidance for the distribution of Cabinet-related material [PDF 231 KB]
Guidance is available on these topics:
Guidance on developing and reviewing a dispute resolution scheme
Guidance on dispute resolution
Guidance on dispute resolution clauses in contracts
Guidance on how to make a complaint
Guidance, standards, and information
Guidance: Flexible-work-by-default
Guides and resources available for government agencies and communities regarding the Language Assistance Services programme.
Guiding principles on business and human rights [PDF 1.11 MB]
HAB-1 is a series of stratospheric balloons. The primary objective of the balloons is to test components and systems intended to be used by the Kea Atmos high-altitude platform solar-powered aircraft, currently in development.
HOLIDAYS ACT REFORM: FURTHER POLICY DECISIONS Proposal 1 The lack of clarity and certainty provided by the Holidays Act 2003 (the Act) has been a longstanding issue . This paper seeks agreement to change s and additions to some of the previous Government’s policy decisions on the reforms [CAB -20-MIN-0100] before release of an exposure draft for targeted consultation later this year . Relation to Government priorities 2 The Coalition Government’s Action Plan for the period 1 April – 30 June 2024 includes taking Cabinet decisions on the reform of the Act. The proposals in th is paper also relate to the Government’s priority to im prove the quality of regulation. Executive Summary 3 Issues with the Act have been a longstanding concern for employers and payroll providers. The lack of clarity around the processes and calculations required to determine leave entitlements and payments make s the Act difficult to apply in practice . Even with the best intentions, most employers w ill have found themselves non-compliant at some point in time. 4 In 2018 t he previous Government set up a Holidays Act Taskforce (the Taskforce) to make suggestions for improvements to the Act and i n 2020 endorsed all of the Taskforce’s 22 recommendations . Before the 2023 General Election drafting of the Employment (Leave Entitlements) Bill (the Bill)1 began , but was not completed. 5 I am concerned the previous Government’s decisions were not on t rack to improve the simpli city and workability of the legislation . In fact, in some areas I believe the previous Government’s decisions would add complexity and compliance costs. 6 I am seeking Cabinet ’s agreement to make further policy decisions in order to address some of the opportunities the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment ( MBIE ) has identified to increase simpli city, reduce costs and improve workability. My proposals at this time focus on areas where policy and drafting work can be undertaken quickly so that this Government can demonstrate timely progress . 7 I plan to release an exposure draft of the Bill for targeted consultation in September 2024 , along with a consultation document . Releasing an exposure draft for consultation this year will demonstrate this Government’s commitment to resolving this longstanding issue. The exposure draft Bill would incorporate the c hanges proposed in this paper but would largely reflect decisions made by the previous
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE 10 Holidays Act 2003 Review : Issues Paper 2. Overview of the Holidays Act 2003
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE 11 Holidays Act 2003 Review : Issues Paper 25. Employers have a range of obligations that are set out in the Act. These are outlined below:
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE 12 Holidays Act 2003 Review : Issues Paper compliance  Powers of , and determinations by , a Labour Inspector  Obligations relating to holiday and leave records
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE 13 Holidays Act 2003 Review : Issues Paper 3. Who is affected by the issues with the current Act? All employers and employees are affected by non-compliance 3.1 with the Act… 28. We understand that the issues with the Act traverse the range of employment arrangements in New Zealand, and it is unlikely that any employer or employee experiences none of the problems identified in this paper . Even employers with a workforce working standard hours may face challenges such as not including all payments in ‘gross earnings.’ 29. This means that finding solutions to the challenges posed by the Act will support all employers and employees to better understand their obligations and enti tlements. 30. It is clear to the Taskforce that issues with the Holidays Act are widespread across the New Zealand economy. Therefore, any potential solutions need to be applicable to the full range of current and expected future working arrangements. We will need to guard against the risk of solving problems for one group only to create problems for a different group. …but it’s harder for some employers for different reasons… 3.2 31. Some employers find it more difficult to comply with the Act, or are more likely to face implementation issues than others , particularly where there are flexible or variable work practices in place . The review of the Holidays Act will consider the circumstances and arrangements that make compliance more difficult , in order to ensure that solutions are effective and make a difference where it matters most. 32. For instance, some small and medium -sized employers have difficulty interpreting the Act (particularly if they do not have a dedicated payroll professional as part of their staff). This c an lead to poor understanding of the Act, especially its more complex provisions, and may see employers taking ‘shortcuts’ or incorrectly applying parts of the Act. 33. At the other end of the labour market, large employers look to systematise as much of their payroll as possible, particularly when dealing with a workforce that does not have regular and identical work patterns. This drive to systematise the Act can lead large employers to miss parts of the Act that require manual decision -making and interventi on (such as the determination of what a ‘week’ is for an employee). 34. Some employers are unable to comply with the Act because their payroll system is not compliant, or because they misunderstand the capabilities and limitations of their system. Not all payroll systems have been adapted to the requirements of New Zealand law. For example, many payroll systems use accrual methods for calculating leave entitlements. This can cause issue s as accrual system s are based on accumulating an entitlement over time. This approach may not be compatible with the requirements of the Act, in particular the need for entitlements to be determined in relation to the work pattern at the time the leave is taken. Furthermore, the ‘set -and-forget’ mentality that some employers have regarding systemisation often means that payroll systems may not be updated when circumstances change. 35. Some sectors and industries are particularly prone to complex working arra ngements that do not fit the standard working week that the Act was originally based on. For example, sectors that have a high proportion of employees working irregular hours, such
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE 14 Holidays Act 2003 Review : Issues Paper as hospitality, retail or health may be more likely to have problems with i nterpreting and implementing the Act. 36. Any solution recommended by the Taskforce must be simple enough to be understood easily by all employers and employees, able to be systematised in a way that is implementable for most employers who use payroll systems , and cover the wide vari ety of working arrangements while ensuring employees receive their minimum entitlements. 1Have we accurately captured the broad range of business arrangements that can contribute to difficulties with the Act?
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE 15 Holidays Act 2003 Review : Issues Paper 38. Issues also arise in relation to payments as well as the actual entitlements, especially when employees’ pay is variable or the payroll system is not updated when changes occur. This can occur when employees’ payments include commission, incentive -based payments, overtime, or board and lodgings. Complications can arise in determining whether these additional payments are ‘regular’ or not, and therefore should be included in the calculation of payments for leave. 39. It would seem that the more a working arrange ment differs from a ‘standard’ 5 -day working week paid as a regular salary, the more likely employers and employees are to be caught out by the various issues that arise in implementing the Holidays Act. This highlights to the Taskforce that any solution n eeds to be flexible enough to cover all possible arrangements, especially given the expected shifts towards more flexible work patterns in the future.
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE 16 Holidays Act 2003 Review : Issues Paper recommendations about, the role the Inspectorate should play in relation to any new legislation arising from this review. The review can also consider alternative institutional arrangements in relation to the regulation and administration of any new holidays legislation (for example, whether other agencies or institutions should have any particular roles in relation to any new legislation). 5Do you have anything further to add about the role of the Lab our Inspectorate as a regulator of the Holidays Act?
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE 17 Holidays Act 2003 Review : Issues Paper 4. What are the k ey issues with the Holidays Act 2003?
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE 18 Holidays Act 2003 Review : Issues Paper 51. An example of this difficulty is in defining a ‘week’ for the purpose of the annual holidays entitlement when it is not obvious (for example, if employees work on a roster pattern that does not fit a weekly cycle, or they work variable hours and days from week to week). The Act is not explicit about how to achieve this, relying instead on employers and employees reaching agreement about ‘what genuinely constitutes a working week’ (Section 17 (1)) for the employee at the time the leave is taken. 52. The experience of recent years has shown that this approach is not working in practice. The lack of prescription and clear guidance has led to problems, especially in situations where the constructive engagement between employers and employees in relation to leave provisions may not be taking place or where employment agreements (whether individual or collective ) are not kept updated or agree to things that are not in line with the Act. 4.1.2 The Holidays Act is a complex piece of legislation which can prove confusing to those using it… 53. Attempting to provide a range of ways for employers and employees to meet their obligations under the Act means that the Act is complex. There are s everal different pay calculations in the Act including:  Two calculations for Ordinary Weekly Pay ((Section 8 (1) and Section 8 (2) if Section 8 (1) cannot be used)  Calculation of Average Weekly Earnings (Section 5 (1))  Calculation of Relevant Daily Pay (Section 9 (1) )  Calculation of Average Daily Pay (Section 9A (2))  Calculation of annual holiday pay after an entitlement to a holiday has arisen (i.e. where an employee has worked for more than 12 months) (Section 21)  Calculation of annual holiday pay if holiday taken in advance (i.e. before an employee has worked for more than 12 months) (Section 22)  Calculation of annual holiday pay if employment ends within 12 months (Section 23)  Calculation of payment for public holidays (Section 50)  Calculation of payment for alternative h olidays (Section 60) 54. Often employers are unclear which calculations should be used and many employers are not using the correct calculations at the correct times . 55. For example, in relation to payment for BAPS leave it can be difficult to determine when to use Relevant Daily Pay (RDP) as opposed to Average Daily Pay (ADP). Section 9A(1) sets out the circumstances in which an employer “may” use ADP, but there may be circumstances in which an employer may be able to determine both RDP and ADP. In these circumstances the Act is not explicit about what is required (i.e. in situations where the employee’s daily pay varies within the pay period when the holiday or leave falls then the employer may use RDP or ADP). 56. One of the key principles underpinning the Act is that entitlements are determined in relation to the work pattern at the time the leave is taken (so an employee taking leave for a day is paid what they would expec t to have earnt if they had been at work). In practice, however, determining entitlements in relation to the work pattern at the time the leave is taken can pose implementation difficulties (for example, the work pattern can be open to interpretation or ha rd to prove if good records are not kept). 57. Achieving compliance with this requirement imposes a significant operational and administrative burden, particularly in large seasonal workforces and/or where work patterns vary across different groups of employe es. It requires ongoing interaction
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE 19 Holidays Act 2003 Review : Issues Paper between payroll teams, employees, and managers, in relation to all employees. Furthermore, in the modern economy, flexible working is increasingly common. The Act provide s limited guidance as to how an employee’s entitlements should be determined where the employee’s hours of work are flexible (for example, an arrangement whereby the employee is paid for 30 hours per week, which can be performed on any day and at any time of the employee’s choosi ng). 4.1.3 …especially given the l ack of clarity over certain terms used in the Act 58. There are two aspects to this issue:  firstly, some terms or phrases are used in the Act with insufficient guidance provided to ensure a common understanding of the term between a ll parties (e.g. ‘regular’ in relation to determining what income should be included in calculations for the payment of leave). This can lead to issues and misunderstandings if different parties have differing interpretations of particular terms or phrases .  secondly, the Act sets out holidays and leave entitlements in weeks and days while payroll systems more commonly use hours. Issues can arise with the translation between the hours generally used by payroll systems into the days and weeks set out in the Act, especially when an individual’s working arrangements change. Although this is not a problem with the Act itself , it causes practical issues for employers and employees when trying to implement the Act. 7Do you agree with the description of the cross -cutting issues set out above? If not, why not?
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE 2 Holidays Act 2003 Review : Issues Paper Contents
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE 20 Holidays Act 2003 Review : Issues Paper that he works four days a (calendar) week for a block of four weeks and then three days a week for a block of four weeks before the eight -week pattern repeats . It is harder to determine what a working week is for Simon.  Marama works 20 hours a week but has flexibility about when these hours are worked so the number of days worked each week varies between 2 and 5 days. A working week for Marama may best be accounted for in hours rather than days. This approach can however cause other issues (e.g. in terms of determining whether a day that has been requested as holiday falls on an otherwise working day) . 62. If agreement is not reached early on betw een an employer and an employee about what constitutes a working week for that employee, then this can have significant consequences when the employee takes leave. The basis of this agreement may also change over time , meaning that the agreement may need to be revisited. In practice this does not always occur when working arrangements change . 4.2.2 Incorrect accrual over time 63. Problems can arise when payroll systems are used that have not been adapted to the requirements of New Zealand law. For example, many payr oll systems use accrual methods based on accumulating an entitlement over time. This approach may not be compatible with the requirements of the Act, in particular the need for entitlements to be determined in relation to the work pattern at the time the l eave is taken. Particular problems arise when employee’s hours change as, under a straightforward accrual system where the accrual pattern is set at the start of the year , an employee will not accrue sufficient time for four weeks ’ leave if their hours inc rease during the year . This problem occurs even if the accrual pattern is updated when the employee’s hours increase. The result of this is that employees can be left without their correct entitlements while employers may be liable for remediation. 64. This issue can be exacerbated by the ‘set-and-forget’ mentality that some employers have regarding systemisation , as this often means that payroll systems may not be updated when employees’ circumstances change. 4.2.3 Knowing which method to use to determine payments for annual holidays, and how to use it correctly 65. Section 21 requires employees to be paid for their annual holidays at a rate that is the greater of either their ordinary weekly pay (OWP) at the point the leave is taken, or average weekly earnings (A WE) for the 12 months previous. Correctly applying section 21 requires employers to calculate both OWP and AWE and use the larger number. 66. OWP can be determined in two ways. Section 8 (1) defines it as the amount that the employee receives under their empl oyment agreement for an ordinary working week (including regular additional payments such as overtime and commission). However, section 8 (2) allows OWP to be calculated using an averaging formula over the previous 4 weeks – if it is “not possible” to dete rmine OWP using section 8 (1). 67. Ensuring compliance with section 21, therefore, requires employers to have detailed wage and time records for employees that include details about earnings for the purposes of OWP and “gross earnings” over a longer time perio d for the purposes of AWE. The employer is also required to calculate the payment for both OWP and AWE (which can involve a subjective decision about what payments are deemed to be ‘regular’) and then use the larger number. 68. There are many stages in this pr ocess that introduce the risk of non -compliance, if reliable quality assurance is not used .
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE 21 Holidays Act 2003 Review : Issues Paper
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE 22 Holidays Act 2003 Review : Issues Paper employer and employee. This make s it difficult to systematise the OWD concept, and for parties to have confidence that the Act is being complied with. Employers sometimes attempt to systematise this by using a particular formula whic h may focus on one particular factor over others but such an approach may not be compliant with the Act. 77. The implications of this decision can be significant. For example, if an employee works on a public holiday that is an OWD for them, then they become entitled to an alternative holiday. If the day is not an OWD, then they do not become entitled to the alternative holiday . 4.3.2 Determining what payments are included in an employee’s ‘relevant daily pay’ and when ‘average daily pay’ can be used instead. 78. The payment for a public holiday, alternative holiday, sick leave and bereavement leave is determined using RDP. This is defined by section 9 as the amount of pay that the employee would have received had they worked on the day concerned. 79. RDP is a subjective and hypothetical decision, based on the historic earnings of the employee as well as the employer’s estimation of what the employee ‘ would have received had the employee worked on the day concerned’ (for instance , by looking at what other employees who did work earnt ). This is more difficult to calculate if employees’ earnings vary considerably (especially if commissions or other additional payments are part of their earnings), if the business is not open on the OWD that is being considered (e.g. it is shut for a public holiday) or where there aren’t sufficient records being kept . 80. Employers and employees can agree on a rate that is to be used as RDP in an employment agreement, but this must be equal to or greater than the rate that would be calculated using the above definition. Employers therefore need to carry out the calculation to be confident that they are compliant. 81. Section 9A allows an employer to use ADP if it is not “possible or practicable” to determine RDP, or if the employee’s daily pay varies wit hin the pay period when the holiday or leave falls. This allows employers to use a simpler 52 -week calculation. It is not clear that this ‘trigger’ is appropriate, and the choice between RDP and ADP may benefit from being made simpler. 82. There is also an is sue relating to the calculation of ADP, as the formula in section 9A (2) requires the employee’s gross earnings to be divided by the number of whole or part days they worked. This could potentially disadvantage employees who work varied hours, as using ADP to calculate their pay treats all days equally regardless of how much is earned on each specific day. 12 Do you agree with the description of the issues relating to BAPS leave here and in Annex Two? If not, why not?
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE 23 Holidays Act 2003 Review : Issues Paper 84. For example, people who work a Monday -Friday five day week observe all public holidays regardless of the day that they fall on. This does not apply to other working arrangements (i.e. if somebody regularly works weekends but not Mondays).
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE 24 Holidays Act 2003 Review : Issues Paper 5. Ideas for change
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE 25 Holidays Act 2003 Review : Issues Paper 6. Next steps 89. Submissions received during this consultation period will be used to inform the work of the Taskforce as it develops its recommendations. 90. Once it has a full understanding of the issues posed by the Act, the Taskforce will develop options for change which will then be robustly tested using anonymised payroll data to assess how well these options could work in practice. 91. Following a robust tes ting phase the Taskforce expects to report back to the Minister of Workplace Relations and Safety with its recommendations by mid -2019. The final report of the Taskforce will be publicly released.
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE 26 Holidays Act 2003 Review : Issues Paper Recap of questions
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE 27 Holidays Act 2003 Review : Issues Paper 12 Do you agree with the description of the issues relating to BAPS leave set out on pages 18-19 and in Annex Two? If not, why not?
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE 28 Holidays Act 2003 Review : Issues Paper Annex 1: Terms of Reference
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE 29 Holidays Act 2003 Review : Issues Paper f. minimise perverse incentives on employers and employees g. ensure the balance of decision-making between employers and employees when it comes to requests for holidays and leave is appropriately calibrated h. are readily applicable to the full range of working and remuneration arrangements in the labour market both now and in the future i. aim to protect overall entitlements for employees. Scope and parameters 8. The Review will retain the purpose of the current Act (in section 3) and (at least) the current levels of entitlements (such as four weeks’ annual holidays, five days’ sick leave). 9. The Group will consider: a. options to improve both the provision of, and payment for, entitlements that meet the objectives set out in paragraph 7, and: i. where trade-offs between competing objectives are required, will be explicit about how these are made ii. may include consideration of the place of the standard five day, 40 hour, working week in the Act b. any other matters relating to the Act that it sees fit. This may include holidays and leave entitlements modified by other Acts (such as the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act 1987). 10. The principles set out in paragraph 4 may also be reconsidered, but options must aim to preserve the intent of these as far as possible. 11. The Group will not, however, consider the complex issue of remediation of historical underpayments of holiday and leave pay. Membership and Process 12. The Group will consist representatives from MBIE, the State Services Commission and Inland Revenue, along with three to four members each representing workers, employers, led by an independent Chair with the power to commission work. 13. The Group will be chaired by Gordon Anderson, a law professor at Victoria University. The Chair is an independent/neutral party in the Group discussions, whose purpose is to facilitate the parties to reach jointly agreed recommendations to Government. 14. The Group is expected to consult widely to get a comprehensive understanding of the issues with the Act, and draw on international examples of holidays and leave legislation where appropriate. 15. The Group is also expected to work closely with technical experts such as payroll providers, business rules specialists, and service design and delivery specialists to assist with the design and testing of policy options.
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE 3 Holidays Act 2003 Review : Issues Paper How to have your say
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE 30 Holidays Act 2003 Review : Issues Paper 16. The Group is required to support their recommendations with quantitative analysis of different options, tested with bona fide payroll data, to ensure that those options are readily implementable and adverse consequences have been identified. 17. The parties agree that consistency of attendees will be important for the Group to achieve its objectives, and will ensure that representatives will not be changed unless this is unavoidable. If any change in representatives is required, the party concerned will ensure the new attendee/s have been well briefed on previous discussions and progress. 18. The parties will each ensure that their constituents/stakeholders have appropriate opportunity to have input into development of options, through the parties’ internal governance arrangements. MBIE will ensure that appropriate cross-agency structures in place for senior government officials to be kept informed of, and have input into, the work of the Group. 19. MBIE will provide secretariat support to the Group and information and research that the Group identifies is required to facilitate its discussions. Rules of engagement 20. The parties agree that they will: a. work together in good faith, balancing the interests of all parties b. hold discussions in confidence and on a without prejudice basis c. agree any external communications at each meeting. 21. If the pa rties are unable to reach agreement on recommendations, the Group’s final report will outline: a. the areas where the parties have reached agreed recommendations b. the areas of difference. Timing and reporting 22. The Group will report back to the Minister of Workplace Relations and Safety with their recommendations within 12 months. This timeframe will give the Group sufficient time to commission work and undertake robust testing of options. 23. The Group will also provide an interim report after six months, so that Cabinet – and the New Zealand public – can be informed about the Group’s progress. 24. Each party will be responsible for reporting to their constituents/stakeholders, in accordance with any messaging agreed during the Group’s discussions and as required by their internal governance mechanisms. In doing so, the parties agree to honour the confidentiality of the Group’s discussions.
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE 31 Holidays Act 2003 Review : Issues Paper Annex 2: More detailed list of issues The table below provides a more detailed list of the issues that the Taskforce is aware of that employers, employees and payroll providers face in implementing the Holidays Act. Some of these issues relate to the systems that employers tend to use in their attempts to comply with the Act rather than being issues with the legislation itself. These issues are included here because they still represent a practical barrier that can prevent employees from getting the entitlements that they are due, and will be relevant to any ideas for change to the current framework . The Labour Inspectorate’s guidance document on the Holidays Act is a useful resource for employers, and provides useful additional material in relation to compliance with the Act. This Guidance is available here: https://www.employment.govt.nz/assets/Uploads/Holidays-Act- 2003-Guidance- on-annual-holidays-Sep-2017v1.pdf . Description of issue Section of Act Cross -cutting issues Meaning of ‘regular’ in relation to payments The Act refers to payments that are a ‘regul ar’ part of the employee’s pay but no definition of how ‘regular’ is to be interpreted is provided. What payments are included in ‘gross earnings’ Employers not always clear what payments should be included as gross earnings, such as discretiona ry payments, cashed up holidays and redundancy payments. 14 Transferring an employee from ‘intermittent or irregular’ to permanent work pattern Complexity associated with providing correct entitlements when a n employee’s work pattern changes. 28 Definition of ‘otherwise working day’ The Act provides a range of criteria to assist in the determination of what is an ‘otherwise working day’ , but t hese criteria are not always used/well -understood, and sometimes non-compliant ‘rules’ can be agreed to. 12 Definition of ‘ordinary working week’ Although the term ‘ordinary working week’ is used in the Act (Section 8 (1) (a)) , this term is not defined. While it may be easy to determine a working week for some employe es this is not true for all. 8 Determining which averaging formula should be used, and when The Act provides a number of different formulae for use in different situations (e .g. for Relevant Daily Pay, Average Daily Pay, Average Weekly Earnings or Ordina ry Weekly Pay ). Knowing exactly what formula should be used requires correctly configured software, or a high level of knowledge and confidence with the Act. Employees are often not aware of possible issues with their entitlements being met. Sickness/bereavement leave arising while employee is taking annual holidays/public holiday 36-39 and 61A
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE 32 Holidays Act 2003 Review : Issues Paper If an employee suffers a bereavement while taking annual holidays, the Act requires the employer to allow them to take the day as bereavement leave instead. If an em ployee is sick while taking annual holidays, an employer may allow the employee to take the day as sick leave rather than annual holidays. Some employers do not understand their obligations in relation to this , and find exchanging holidays and leave confus ing (particularly given that employers are required to apply different approaches to the pay for these different types of leave) . Employment ending with entitlement to annual holidays overlapping a public holiday Employees are entitled to pa yment for a public holiday if it falls within the period that would have been covered by an existing entitlement to annual holidays. This is not always well -understood, and employer s may be using an accrual system that doesn’t differentiate between entitle ment and accrued leave. 40 Employers having insufficient record -keeping and operating a ‘set -and- forget’ mentality There may be an assumption (by employers and employees) that an electronic system is correct and reliable. Issues can arise if systems are not updated when working arrangements and/or pay change. Employers/payroll systems calculating entitlements in hours rather than weeks or days This can cause complexity and difficulty in understanding entitlements, and can present challenges with translat ing different units of entitlement. Sale and transfer of business Although the issue of the transfer of holidays and leave entitlements following the sale , contracting out or transfer of a business is dealt with for some employees by Part 6A of the Empl oyment Relations Act 2000 (which provides protection to the terms and conditions of specified categories of employees on the sale or transfer of a business), the Holidays Act is silent on this issue. We understand that in reality the practice varies across the economy and additional clarity would be provided if this issue was explicitly addressed in the Holidays Act. Annual Holidays – Determining entitlements and payments Determining what payments are included in the OWP calculation Can be difficu lt for employers to determine what payments are included, and employees may not be aware. Also requires contact with payroll to ensure it is always correct for the employee’s working arrangements. 8 Defining what a ‘week’ is Employer and employee can agree what a week looks like, but this requires good communication and agreement about working arrangements. Issues also arise when working out what portion of a week has been used when an employee takes leave, and this might be Part 2
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE 33 Holidays Act 2003 Review : Issues Paper calculated differently (and incorrectly). Inconsistency in the calculation of AWE Section 5 refers to 1/52 of gross earnings; section 21 refers to average weekly earnings for 12 months previous. 5 and 21(2)(b)(ii) Not clear what ‘not possible’ means for using the OWP formula rather than Section 8 (1) Section 8 (2) allows for a simple formula to be used if it is ‘not possible’ to determine OWP. This is not very clear for employers, and hard to systematise. 8 OWP calculation divisor The calculati on for OWP can be confusing for employers and payroll providers because it can sometimes refer to more than 4 weeks, but needs to be divided by 4. 8(2) Pay-as-you-go provision for workers being paid 8% holiday pay Can be difficult for employers to know wh en it is appropriate to use the PAYG provision. When working arrangements change, it can be difficult for employers to know when to start providing 4 weeks, rather than 8% pay. 28 Annual holiday pay across multiple pay periods (difference between OWP and AWE) Section 21 (2) has two different calculations, which may provide different results. The Act requires the greater figure to be used, but some employers find it difficult to understand and use this section. 21(2)(b) Incorrect accrual over time The use of accrual systems can cause problems as the amount of leave accrued may not provide a full entitlement, particularly if the employees working arrangements change during the year . This can also cause issues when an employee leaves employment as the outsta nding leave balance may be incorrect if calculated using an accrual approach. 16, 23-25 ‘Cashing up’ annual holidays entitlements Issues associated with the process for employees to request a portion of their entitlement to be converted into money. This i s related to employers and employees referring to annual holidays entitlements as money owed, rather than time owed. 28A B.A.P.S – Determining entitlements and payments Determining an ‘otherwise working day’ Defining an otherwise working day is fundament al for all parts of the Act, but it can be difficult for employers and employees to understand exactly what it means where flexible or variable work patterns are in use. 12 and 56 Calculating hypothetical wages for RDP RDP is based on what the employee would have otherwise earned, had they worked. This is a subjective decision that the Act provides guidance on, but not firm answers. This is hard to systematise for employers, and 9
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE 34 Holidays Act 2003 Review : Issues Paper hard for employees to determine whether they have been paid correctly. Determining what additional payments need to be included in RDP calculations Similar to above, the payments are not always easy to determine, and the required information may not be captured in payroll data (e .g. payroll system captures base wage but not additional payments). 9 Payments for working on a public holiday If an emplo yee works on a public holiday, Section 50 requires them to be paid according to RDP/ADP + half. ADP is only used if the RDP can't be determined . In som e cases although the employee actually worked it may not be possible to determine their RDP (e.g. if their shift only included part of a public holiday) in which case ADP needs to be used. Greater clarity could be provided for employers about how to deal w ith these situations. 9 Transferring public holidays Transferring holidays can be a confusing process, especially given that an employee can work on a public holiday and receive an alternative holiday instead. Requires ongoing agreement between employer and employee. 44A and 44B ADP calculation counting part days as whole days Some employees find themselves disadvantaged when picking up small shifts if their employer is using ADP, because this lowers the average they would be paid. 9A(2) Trigger to use ADP instead of RDP One trigger to use ADP instead of RDP is if the employee’s daily pay varies within the relevant pay period, which some argue is too broad. 9A(1)(b) Applying sick/bereavement leave entitlements to those who work part - time/casual Some employers suggest that these entitlements should be provided pro rata. Should the Act explicitly provide for this? Subpart 4 Taking sick leave for part days Some employees are only off work for part of a day (e .g. they go home early). The Act does n ot provide guidance for part days to be paid as sick leave, but some employers do this anyway. Greater clarity around this would be helpful. Other issues Coverage of bereavement leave list Are there other categories of person that should be included in this list? 69(2)(a) Mondayisation of public holidays Some employees claim that this gives preference to employees who work a standard 5 day week including Monday. These employees get the benefit of a paid day off where public holidays either fall on a Monday or fall on a Saturday or Sunday and are then taken on the following Monday. Employees who do not work a standard 5 day week may be considered to be missing out on public holidays because when a public 45 and 45A
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE 35 Holidays Act 2003 Review : Issues Paper holiday falls on a weekday that they do not usu ally work they do not receive a paid day off. Holidays Act override in Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act This section overrides the Holidays Act so that a person who returns to work after a period of parental leave is entitled to only average weekly earnings for 12 months on the leave that they be came entitled to during their absence . This effectively means that annual holidays taken the moment they return are paid $0, which gradually increases over the next 12 months. It could be argued that this approach is discriminatory, and contrary to the objectives of the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act (to protect the rights of employees during pregnancy and parental leave). There is a further problem that most payroll systems cannot distinguish between different values of leave. PLEPA s42 Closedowns There are a number of areas where the Act could provide greater clarity in relation to closedown periods. These include:  The relationship between the ‘must’ in Section 34 (2) and t he ‘may’ in Section 34 (4) ( i.e. whether Section 34 (2) takes precedence because it says the employer ‘must pay the employee 8%’ or whether this is an either/or situation where the employee is either paid the 8% (as per Section 34 (2)) or agrees to use a nnual holidays in advance (as per Section 34 (4)))  The definition of ‘reasonably proximate’ in Section 35 (2) in relation to the date nominated as the anniversary date for an employee not entitled to annual holidays – there have been cases of employers nom inating dates several weeks away from the actual closedown period. 29-35 Entitlement to an alternative holiday The entitlement arises regardless of how much of a public holiday is worked, but some employers credit hours worked. 56 Payment of alternative holidays Alternative holidays can only be paid out after 12 months, but this sometimes happens incorrectly. 61
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE 4 Holidays Act 2003 Review : Issues Paper Glossary of terms
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE 5 Holidays Act 2003 Review : Issues Paper Pay-as-you-go (‘PAYG’) annual holiday pay : Employees who meet either of two specific sets of criteria (i.e. are on a fixed -term arrangement for less than 12 months or work on an intermittent or irregular basis ) can agree with t heir employer to be paid annual holiday pay on top of their gross earnings for each pay period, instead of receiving paid annual holidays (Section 28 of the Act ). Paying out some of the annual holiday entitlement : This is commonly referred to as ‘cashing up’ some annual holidays. Employees can ask their employer to pay out up to a maximum of one week of their minimum four -week annual holiday entitlement each entitlement year (instead of taking the time off as paid annual holidays). The employee must make th e request for this pay out and the request must be in writing. Employers may have a policy against paying out (including in an applicable collective agreement), but even if they do not have such a policy they do not have to agree to a pay -out (Sections 28A to 28F of the Act ). Permanent employee : A person employed on an ongoing indefinite basis. Relevant daily pay (‘RDP’) : What an employee would have received if they were at work on that day. Relevant daily pay includes: payments such as regular (taxable) allowances, productivity or incentive -based payments (including commission and bonuses) if the employee would have received them on the relevant day; overtime payments, if the employee would have received them on the relevant day; and the cash value of boa rd or lodgings if this has been provided by the employer. It does not include employer contribution payments into an employee superannuation fund or reimbursements payable to the worker for the day (Sections 9, 9A, 10, 10A, 11, 49, 50, 52, 53, 60 and 71 of the Act ). Regular payments : Regular payments , such as payments for overtime and productivity or incentive -based payments, are included in calculations of ordinary weekly pay. Although t he Act does not define what constitutes a regular payment, payments made in respect of work regularly undertaken should be included even if these payment s are not made every pay period (Section 8 of the Act ).
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE 6 Holidays Act 2003 Review : Issues Paper Forewo rd
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE 7 Holidays Act 2003 Review : Issues Paper 1. Introduction
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE 8 Holidays Act 2003 Review : Issues Paper patterns beyond the standard five day, 40 hour working week. It has become evident that neither of the se reviews was able t o fully meet these objectives. Overview of the current review 1.2 10. In recent years it has become apparent that there is a high level of non -compliance with the Act. While it often works for a standard, five day, 40 hour week, the Act can be difficult to apply to more diverse working arrangements and complex remuneration packages. N on-compliance has resulted in many employees not receiving the correct payments for their leave and emp loyers spending significant resources on remediating historical underpayments and complying with the Act. 11. The Taskforce that has been established for the current review is required to develop, test and make recommendations to the Government on policy optio ns for the provision of, and payment for, holiday and leave entitlements that: o continue to promote the existing purpose of the Holidays Act 2003 , which is to promote balance between work and other aspects of employees’ lives by providing minimum entitlemen ts to annual holidays, public holidays, sick leave and bereavement leave o provide clarity and certainty for employers and employees so that employees receive their correct entitlements o are simpler than the current Act in relation to provisions of, and payme nt for, entitlements to holidays and leave o are readily implementable in a payroll system o minimise compliance costs for employers o minimise perverse incentives on employers and employees o ensure the balance of decision -making between employers and employees when it comes to requests for holidays and leave is appropriately calibrated o are readily applicable to the full range of working and remuneration arrangements in the labour market both now and in the future o aim to protect overall entitlements for employees . 12. The review is being carried out by a tripartite Taskforce , comprising representatives from government, the Council of Trade Unions and Business New Zealand. Professor Gordon Anderson, an employment law specialist from Victoria University , is chairing the Taskforce and MBIE is providing Secretariat support . The Taskforce’s Terms of Reference can be found in Annex One and the Cabinet paper establishing the Taskforce can be found at: http://www.mbie.govt.nz/info-services/employment-skills/legislation- reviews/holidays-act-review 13. The Taskforce will report back to the Minister of Workplace Relations and Safety with its recommendations by mid -2019 . This timeframe will give the group sufficient time to commission work and undertake robust testing of options. 14. Any changes the Government decides to make as a result of the review will need to go through the legislative process, so it will likely be some time before a new Act is implemented. Scope of the review 1.3 15. The scope of the review is sufficiently broad so as to generate fundamentally new ways of providing for entitlements and pay, while retaining the purpose of the current Act and (at least) the c urrent levels of entitlement. 16. Full consideration will be given to designing an Act that works equally well for the ever increasing range of different working and pay arrangements that can be seen in the labour market. This may include consideration of whe ther the reference to the working
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE 9 Holidays Act 2003 Review : Issues Paper week should be retained in the holidays’ legislation and if so, what form this should take. 17. The review also ha s scope to consider any other matters relat ing to the Act that it sees fit. This may include holidays and leave entitlements modified by other Acts (such as the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act 1987). The Taskforce will consult to get a comprehensive understanding of the issues with the current legislation, and draw on examples from overseas jurisdictio ns. 18. The review will not include the issue of remediation of historical underpay ments of holiday and leave pay. Employers still have an obligation to remediate employees for current and historic underpayments and must be compliant with the current Act until new legislation comes into effect. MBIE will continue to provide support and engagement on these issues to as sist employers in the meantime.
HOLIDAYS ACT TASKFORCE Final Report OCTOBER 2019
Haami Piripi National Iwi Chairs Forum
Haka Ka Mate Attribution Act guidelines
Hamilton & Waikato Tourism
Hamilton & Waikato tourism ambassadors
Handle your complaint in a manner that is:
Hari at the Mars Desert Research Station in Utah in 2011.
Has overall responsibility for ensuring MBIE meets its obligations under the Prosecution policy
Has strong space manufacturing and space applications sub-sectors, and cutting-edge research and development capability within several universities across the country; and
Hastings District Council
Hatchery Technology Development for the Aquaculture of Freshwater Crayfish and Mussels
Hauora/Health: Improving health and social well-being.
Have a high academic standing and have obtained a minimum grade point average (GPA) of 3.0 or higher on a scale of 4.0, or an equivalent standard. You will need to convert your New Zealand grades to the US GPA 4.0 scale.
Have previously completed an undergraduate or graduate program in STEM.
Have settings that are flexible, enabling the system to respond to labour market changes over time
Have your say at the consultation section on the MBIE website
Have your say on changing the Building Code requirements for insulation in homes and other buildings.
Have your say on work health and safety
Have your say: Options to address safety risks of corded window coverings
Have your say: Seeking feedback on moving towards a financially sustainable mail service
Having a well-supported, equitable, and diverse startup ecosystem in New Zealand will create high-paying jobs, improve income equality, support our transition to a carbon free economy, and make Aotearoa a place where highly-skilled people want to live.
Having been in tourism for almost 20 years, Tak has spent his working life in the industry undertaking a wide range of roles from front line hosting and tour guiding to business development and marketing management.
Having more businesses investing in technology and innovation will create higher-paying jobs for New Zealanders and diversify the economy into new industries and markets.
Having strong social dialogue on these issues has strengthened employee and employer voice on important cross-cutting issues. The Forum meets three times a year and is supported by officials from MBIE and the Treasury. All documents for the Forum that were released earlier than February 2020 can be found on the Treasury website.
Having systems in place to enable timely and effective monitoring and auditing of prosecution decision-making (including relating to infringements)
Hawke's Bay Regional Workforce Plan 2022
He Kai Kei Aku Ringa 2023 Action Plan
He Kai Kei Aku Ringa 2023 Action Plan [PDF 222KB]
He Kai Kei Aku Ringa 2023 will be delivered through an action plan that draws together new and emerging projects from across government agencies.
He Kai Kei Aku Ringa: Strategy and action plan
He Tapuae Service Management Plan [PDF 600KB]
He Toronga Pakihi ki Taranaki
He aka ka toro navigation fund 2023 successful projects
He has an extensive career in international marketing and leadership roles spanning more than 20 years. Prior to the airport, Justin held the roles of Director of Trade, PR & Major Events and GM Marketing at Tourism New Zealand and before that he was Director of Marketing at McDonald's New Zealand & Pacific Islands and Marketing Manager at Coca-Cola Oceania.
He has more recently served in senior roles in the public sector, including as Deputy Secretary, Higher Courts at the Ministry of Justice and as General Manager, NZ Petroleum and Minerals at Ministry of Economic Development.
He tipu ka hua investment programme
Health and Disability Commissioner
Health and Safety at Work (Adventure Activities) Amendment Regulations 2023 (SL 2023/189)
Health and Safety at Work (Adventure Activities) Amendment Regulations 2023 - Briefings and reports [PDF 9.5MB]
Health and Safety at Work Act
Health and Safety at Work Act 2015
Health and Safety at Work Act 2015: Plant, structures, and hazardous work
Health and Safety in Employment (Mining Operations and Quarrying Operations) Regulations 2013
Health and Safety in Employment Amendment Act 2013
Health and forensic science services
Health and safety at work
Health and safety at work regulatory system
Health and safety at work strategy
Health and safety consultations
Help for victims of people trafficking
Help people get into work quickly and stay in work, reducing negative impact of job-loss and time on benefit for people and the economy, and changing longer-term trajectories for people with a view to improving employment outcomes, limiting increases in benefit numbers and reducing them over time.
Helping migrants and refugees to make New Zealand their home.
Helping workers find and keep decent jobs
Hemi is a mobile crane operator who has three different jobs working for oil and gas companies.
Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II passed away on 8 September 2022, in the 71st year of her reign as Queen of New Zealand.
Her career outlook looks promising, until a pandemic strikes: borders are closed, travel bookings plummet, and Natalie is made redundant. Flying a plane involves more than handling the wheel, it requires an eye for detail, critical thinking, communication, data literacy and leadership. Natalie uses her insurance payments to take stock of her career and look for a new path. After four months, she finds a job that matches her skills: operations manager at a recycling plant.
Here is some more information about how Immigration manages data which includes aspects of data sharing
Hi I am Bill Nelson, and I am priviledged to be the Administrator of NASA.
Hierarchy of New Zealand building control system
High (left) to low (right)
High Tech Manufacturing report
High Technology Manufacturing report 2013
High share of quarterly renewable electricity generation as industrial demand for electricity fell
High-altitude vehicle (HAV) licence
High-altitude vehicles are licenced under the Outer Space and High-altitude Activities Act 2017 and the Outer Space and High-altitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulations 2017.
His primary research is in high temperature superconductivity (HTS). He was the founder of the programme that developed HTS Roebel cables including the development of the manufacturing and characterisation processes. His current interests include the application of HTS to space technology.
Historic day in the campaign to beat plastic pollution
Historic reform of corporate law
Hold approved Great Ride status, as provided by the Minister of Tourism and Hospitality.
Holiday Parks Association
Holidays Act 2003 R eview – Terms of Reference Proposal 1 This paper seeks Cabinet’s approval to a review of the Holidays Act 2003 (the Act) on the basis of the Terms of Reference attached in Annex One. Executive Summary 2 The Holidays Act 2003 (the Act) provides minimum entitlements to annual holidays, public holidays and sick and bereavement leave to promote balance between work and other aspects of employees’ lives. 3 Systemic compliance issues with the Act first came to light in 2012 and since then it has become apparent that non-compliance is widespread, with a large number of employers struggling to meet their obligations under the Act and a large number of employees not receiving their correct entitlements. This situation has arisen because there are problems both with the implementation of the Act in payroll systems, and with the Act itself. 4 Over the last three years, the Ministry of Business, I nnovation and Employment ( MBIE ) has delivered a payroll strategy led by the Labour Inspectorate to address the implement ation issues, but this alone has not been sufficient. I consider that only a broad review of the Act will provide an enduring solution. 5 I propose that a tripartite working group be convened to review the Act and make recommendations for change to Government within 12 months. I seek the Commit tee’s agreement to appoint Gordon Anderson, a law professor at Victoria University, as an independent Chair of the Group. Key objectives of the review will be to develop options that: 5.1 make the provision of, and payment for, entitlements to holidays and lea ve simpler and more readily applicable to the range of working arrangements in the labour market 5.2 provide clarity and certainty to employers and employees so that employees receive their correct entitlements and employers’ indirect compliance costs are reduced 5.3 aim to protect the overall entitlements to employees 5.4 are easy to systematise and implement in payroll systems . 6 T he Group will be expected to convene appropriate technical experts to robustly test options to ensure that this objective is met and any adverse consequences are identified. The lack of such rigorous testing was a significant failing of previous reviews. 7 The review must be forward looking, and consideration of the issue of remediation of underpayments under the current Act is out of scope of the review. However, I acknowledge that this issue is of significant concern to a number of private and public sector entities, particularly those that may currently be considering investment in new payroll systems. 8 The obligation of employers to remediate employees for historical underpayments remains, as does their obligation to ensure compliance with the current Act until new legislation is passed. It is likely to be a minimum of two years until new legislation is passed and I anticipate that there will be a significant implementation period following that to allow service providers to develop new products to deliver on the changes . 9 In the meantime, the Labour Inspectorate will continue to work to support employers to remediate employees and amend systems to be compliant with the current Act. The Holidays Act 2003 provides minimum entitlements to holidays and leave … 10 The purpose of the Act is to promote balance between work and other aspects of employees’ lives by providing minimum entitlements to annual holidays, public holidays, sick leave and bereavement leave. The Act provides a number of calculations for determining pay when holidays or leave are taken. 11 T he Act also covers a number of issues such as annual closedowns for businesses, transferring of public holidays and ‘cashing up’ one week’s holiday. The enforcement provisions follow those in the Employment Relations Act 2000 and, as with other minimum entitlements, permits both employees and labour inspectors to take cases. 12 While the Act provides for certain levels of minimum entitlements, it does not prescribe how these are to be provided. For a standard five day, 40 hour working week, this is straightforward, but in other situations it is not obvious, such as when employees work unpredictable hours. In these situations the Act relies on employers and employees reaching agreement as to how entitlements will be met or taken. 13 There is some prescription around determining pay for holidays and leave – for example, pay can be based on an averaging formula if it is not possible to work out what the employee would have been paid if they had worked – but there remains a high degree of ambiguity in situations when remuneration arrangements are complex (for example, including commission or incentive payments). … but there is compelling evidence of widespread non- compliance with the Act 14 These challenges with the Act itself, combined with poor implementation in payroll systems and the business processes that support them, have led to widespread non-compliance with the legislation. 15
Holidays Act 2003 Review Issues Paper August 2018
Holidays Act 2003 Review Issues Paper [PDF 962KB]
Holidays Act 2003 Review – Terms of Reference Purpose 1. The purpose of the Holidays Act Working Group (the Group) is to make recommendations to Government for a clear and transparent set of rules for providing entitlements to, and payment for, holidays and leave that can be readily implemented in a payroll system and is applicable to an increasingly diverse range of working and pay arrangements. 2. It is important that a customer-focused approach is taken to this review to ensure that recommendations are readily implementable by employers and their payroll providers. Background 3. There is widespread non-compliance with the Holidays Act 2003 (the Act) and it is generally accepted that this is due both to issues with the implementation of the legislation in payroll systems and the business processes that support these, and issues with the legislation itself. 4. The Act works well for a standard, five day, 40 hour week, but can be difficult to apply to more diverse working arrangements and complex remuneration packages. This is primarily because the Act i s based on two key principles relating to entitlements and pay: a. that entitlements are determined in relation to the work pattern at the time the leave is taken b. that employees should not be financially disadvantaged by taking leave, that is, they should be paid (at least) what they would have earned had they worked. 5. In these situations, the Act relies heavily on employers making judgements as to how the provisions of the Act apply to the specific circumstances of the individual employees, and in some cases agreement with the employee is required. In some cases, these may need to happen each time leave is requested. 6. The result is an Act that does not provide certainty to employers and employees, is difficult for employees and employers to understand and interpret, is hard to systematise in a payroll system, and can incur relatively high compliance costs for employers. Objectives 7. The Group is required to develop, test and make recommendations to the Government on policy options for the provision of, and payment for, holiday and leave entitlements that: a. continue to promote the existing purpose of the Holidays Act 2003 b. provide clarity and certainty for employers and employees so that employees receive their correct entitlements c. are simpler than the current Act in relation to provisions of, and payment for, entitlements to holidays and leave d. are readily implementable in a payroll system e. minimise compliance costs for employers
Holidays Act 2003 Review: Terms of Reference [PDF 206KB]
Holidays Act 2003 Review: Terms of Reference: Cabinet paper [PDF 102KB]
Holidays Act Review: Policy decisions
Holidays Act Review: Policy decisions for an exposure draft of the Bill
Holidays Act Review: Policy decisions for an exposure draft of the Bill [PDF 811KB]
Holidays Act Review: background, progress and next steps [PDF 394KB]
Holidays Act Taskforce members
Holidays Act reform: further policy decisions
Holidays Act reform: further policy decisions [PDF 577KB]
Holidays Act: Issues paper
Home Inspection Survey Report and the full list of recommendations
Hon Brooke van Velden Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety
Hon Brooke van Velden Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety ..... / ...... / ......
Hon Dr David Clark Minister for the Digital Economy and Communications ) ) ) )
Hon Grant Robertson Minister of Finance
Hon Iain Lees -Galloway Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety
Hon Willie Jackson Minister for Māori Development
Horizon Europe Pillar 2 actions are structured in 6 thematic 'Clusters', with each having a published Work Programme outlining topics to be addressed in the current period. The Work Programmes include details of the scope of the topics, the expected impacts and outcomes, the available budget, and any conditions relating to the call.
Horizon Europe Research Fund
Horizon Europe Top-Up Fund reporting template
Horizon Europe and New Zealand
Horizon Europe guidance and reference documents are available through the EU Funding and Tenders Portal.
Horizon Europe reference documents and guidance
Horizon Europe unlocked: Monthly drop-in Q&A
Horowhenua District Council
Horticulture Technology Catalyst
Hospitality workforce survey report
Hosts for new applied doctorates scheme announced
Hotel accommodation for locally-based participants.
Hours or days worked and the work pattern. This can be, but is not limited to, a nine-day fortnight, compressed hours, part time hours, job share.
Household sales-based electricity cost data and publicly advertised retail electricity tariff data
Housing Affordability Measure
Housing New Zealand Corporation
Housing New Zealand Corporation is a Crown agent that provides housing services for people in need. Housing New Zealand manages state houses and tenancies.
Housing and tenancy regulatory system
How affordable do you think the levy will be for you?
How can I tell? Recognising child abuse [PDF 12MB]
How can we ensure the proposed income insurance scheme honours the Treaty partnership?
How can we set up governance in our regulatory system?
How do we collect information?
How does it relate to other guidance?
How does the adventure activities regulatory regime operate to manage risks where activities intersect with natural hazards? What are the roles and responsibilities of the organisations involved in the regime (WorkSafe, auditors and operators) to identify and manage these hazards?
How effective are resilience-focused policies?
How effective are resilience-focused policies? A literature review [PDF 990KB]
How effective are resilience-focused policies? Summary of literature review [PDF 473KB]
How our funding process works
How our investment is helping to produce science and innovation success in New Zealand
How our investment is helping to produce science and innovation success in New Zealand.
How space contributes to the New Zealand economy
How the government will contribute to this objective
How to apply for Horizon Europe funding
How to comply with consumer laws and deal with complains in the best way.
How to follow up or make a complaint
How to get in touch with the New Zealand Space Agency if you would like more information or have a question.
How to make an OIA request
How to navigate GCDR tools and resources.
How to register as a network operator under the Telecommunications Act 2001.
How to register as a postal operator
How to register for a board role
How to report migrant exploitation
How to use the Migrant Employment Data
How we collect and use information about people flying in and out of New Zealand
How we forecast the estimated discount
How we process complaints
How we use ORCID identifiers
How we will monitor the Strategy
How well is WorkSafe performing? (efficiency of resource use, and value add / quality of outputs delivered)
How will the new arrangements be implemented? During the policy design proce ss following the 2020 Cabinet decisions, stakeholders unanimously agreed that, given the scale and complexity of the changes, an 18 - month implementation period between the date the Bill receives Royal assent and the date on which it comes into force would be required to support a smooth transition to the new rules.
How will the new arrangements be monitored, evaluated, and reviewed? Monitoring, evaluation and review pro cesses set out in the 2020 RIS remain relevant,
How will this collaboration change how you operate in the future?
How will this partnership help you expand the breadth of your research?
How willWhat doWhat is the What harm applicants What is it What areapplicantscommitment could operations monitor safety that the the resourcesneed to dooperation to ensuring cause to performance and that you needto keep the public safety? the public? the effectiveness to be safe? does? pubilc safe? of controls? Figure 1: Safety Case Considerations Description of Activities A summary of who (and where) you are, the type of activity you undertake and what is important to your operation is useful context. This information should be focused at a high level. Consider: ȓ Who are we and what do we do? ȓ Where do we operate? ȓ What type of activity do we undertake? ȓ How are we governed? ȓ When do we operate? ȓ Organisational structure Applicants could look to include within the body of the safety case high-level maps and diagrams of facilities and vehicles as well as organisation charts. Licenses from other regulatory regimes (where relevant) and operational frameworks such as the organisations safety framework are useful supporting evidence. Safety Commitment and Goals Safety is a fundamental part of any organisation and must be integrated throughout the management systems. How the leadership will achieve and ensure public safety must be evident. The regulations require applicants to describe the systems that have been (or will be) implemented to protect public safety. It could be useful to include a set of public safety principles that your organisation can use to strongly influence safety culture. Organisational principles should not be a statement of compliance with legislation and regulations. They should be: ȓ meaningful; ȓ appropriate; and ȓ clear enough to prevent ambiguity. 4
However, Section 17 also outlines that the Minister may decline to grant a payload permit if
However, any postal operator can issue other unofficial stamps for the mail they carry. They can use the words 'New Zealand' only if:
However, no one may carry letters for profit unless they are registered as a postal operator with us.
However, the very characteristics that enable this speed, accuracy and security also pose unique challenges for long-distance transmission.
However, where we require information that is relevant to us considering and investigating compliance breaches, concerns, and initiating our own investigations or inquiries, we may gather information from people or entities using our statutory powers.
Human Resources Development
Human activity is leading to increased greenhouse gas emissions. This is the global picture we have got, surging carbon dioxide, surging methane, and surging nitrous oxide.
Human rights/discrimination
Hunt for the Wilderpeople
Hybrid Technologies Limited
I am Tim Morris. I am the Director of Coriolis. With me is Virginia Wilkinson, she is our Research Director. We were the lead researchers on this project, and we are looking forward to taking you through that research today. This is going to be a brief summary of our work and there is over 1300 pages of material developed in this project, so there is a lot here. We are just going to go through it at a high level and present from the different documents that we have done and talk to some of high-level work we did in the themes really as a teaser for you to go and get into the material more than anything else.
I am aware that there are other government agencies with operational arms that have complex working arrangements that have not yet been consulted. I will ensure they ,
I am delighted to have this opportunity to acknowledge the historic signature of the Artemis Accords by our partners in the New Zealand Space Agency, led by Dr. Crabtree. I would also like to acknowledge the support of Foreign Affairs Minister Mahuta and Economic Development Minister Nash, and thank you for all the work you did to get us here today.
I am pleased to launch the refreshed New Zealand Space and Advanced Aviation Strategy to drive the growth of our space and advanced aviation sectors into the future.
I am seeking a new self-containment certification for my vehicle
I consider that the significant benefits of removing the ‘calendar day’ aspect of the methodology outweigh the disadvantages of doing so may have for some employees in some scenarios.
I do not consider that the impact of this change on leave entitlement and payment calculations would be significant. An employee’s average hours worked on a calendar day would only vary significantly from their average across all days when, despite not having agreed daily hours, the employee does have a discernible pattern of work whereby they work more hours on average on some calendar days than others. For events -based leave (for example sick leave) the averagi ng method would only apply where an employee notified their employee of the intent to take the leave in advance and no hours had been agreed for the day. In typical situations the notification would occur on or shortly before the day of leave however and r ostered hours would be used.
I propos e a flexible approach, enabling treatment of entitlements to be negotiated by outgoing and incoming employers
I propose an implementation period of 18 months is included in the exposure draft Bill
I propose short er implementation periods for s ome changes that can stand alone
I propose that , following Cabinet decisions
I propose that changes the Bill makes to
I propose to adopt the Taskforce’s recommendations in full
I seek confirmation of my decisions on two issues where the Taskforce did not make final decisions 39. There were two outstanding issues from the Taskforce’s report where my decisions were required to ‘fill in the gaps’. These were: Whether the second or ‘sho rt run’ reference period for calculating annual holiday payments should be four or 13 weeks. The Taskforce agreed to a ‘greater of three’ approach to annual holidays payments that included what the employee would have received if they were at work (‘Ordina ry Leave Pay’), a short -run average weekly pay (calculated using either the previous four or the previous 13 weeks), and a long -run average weekly pay over the last 52 weeks. The Taskforce could not agree whether the short -run average should be based on the previous four or 13 weeks, and their report refers this decision to me. What rules should apply for commissions or incentive payments when it is unclear what period of time they were ‘earned’ over. For instance, should the entire amount be treated as tho ugh it was earned within the current pay period, or
ILO Conventions ratified by New Zealand
ILO membership involves partnership between the Government and the most representative organisations of employers and workers in New Zealand:
IMPOSING FEES AND CHARGES Cost recovery Rocket Lab ROCKET LAB Given the unusual and novel nature of this industry in New Zealand and the potential for rapid changes in the nature of launch activities (such as a rapid growth in the number of payloads per launch, or a decrease in the mass of individual payloads, or cha nges in launch The legislation provides all the tools necessary to impose fees, levies and charge s. If a decision was taken to pursue cost -recovery, the Act provides the ability to impose fees if required and is flexible enough to accommodate different fee structures serving a range of policy goals.
INZ Senior Irregular Migration Liaison Officer deployed to Southeast Asia July 2021.
INZ and NZ Police (NZP) Investigations Protocol signed October 2021. The protocol provides a tangible guide on how INZ and NZP work in a collaborative, coordinated and cooperative way.
INZ continues to identify opportunities for proactive communications about serious exploitation and trafficking. In the first half of 2022 INZ provided extensive support and was interviewed for media coverage about a recent prosecution.
INZ continues to work through supporting cross-border trafficking victims on a case-by-case basis, with a heavy reliance on investigative staff who are fulfilling the role of victim supporters. This has been identified as an issue that needs addressing and additional resourcing.
INZ has been engaging with key agencies involved in supporting victims of trafficking to ensure processes are streamlined (Ministry of Health and Ministry of Social Development). A review of the victim certification process is underway, with a joint INZ-NZP workshop held in Quarter 3 2022.
INZ has now completed work to advise migrants when the employer they are working for, on an employer-specific visa, is placed on the Labour Inspectorate stand down list.
INZ has sent fewer letters with information on work rights this year than in previous years.
INZ have arranged for Fijian investigative staff to visit New Zealand, where they will shadow INZ Investigators, meet with Border officials, and share information and training materials.
INZ is continuing regular engagement with key migrant communities (Chinese, Filipino, South Asian and Latin American). Migrant exploitation (including the visa and reporting mechanism) is regularly discussed at migrant network meetings.
INZ now engages with Fiji immigration on a monthly basis to share information and build capacity, including on local cases with no connection to New Zealand.
INZ to work with Fiji, Kiribati, Samoa Immigration (and other partners if requested) to deliver bespoke capacity building support to address forced labour, people trafficking and slavery, once work plans are confirmed in 2023.
INZ will operationalise changes arising from the introduction of the Migrant Worker Protection Bill, specifically the new infringement regime and the establishment of a broader stand down list of employers.
IRD disputes review process
ISBN (Online): 978-1-99-106930 -6 May 2025
ISBN (online) 978-1- 98-853595- 1
ISBN (online) 978-1-991143-26-6
ISSB issues inaugural global sustainability disclosure standards
ITPs are focused on long-term transformation, and identify actions and initiatives for near-term implementation over 1 to 3 year periods.
ITPs were developed for 8 sectors: Advanced Manufacturing, Agritech, Construction, Digital Technologies, Fisheries, Food and Beverage, Forestry and Wood Processing and Tourism.
IVL annual performance reports
IVS analysis and research
IVS classifications and definitions
IVS data available from Stats NZ
IVS questionnaire and brochures
Identification and Management of Risks 7
Identification of barriers and enablers provided insights about the activities and approaches that would be needed for a shift to more circularity in the New Zealand economy to realise emission reduction potential and economic benefits.
Identifying priorities to support workers who are displaced or at risk of displacement [PDF 331KB]
If a complainant does not accept that their complaint has been responded to, or resolved to their satisfaction, the complainant may consider contacting the:
If a review is needed, MBIE will prepare and release a consultation document for interested parties to suggest occupational diseases and providing supporting research.
If an applicant has committed a criminal offence, their application will be individually assessed.
If an employee identifies an incident of child abuse or neglect and determines that the child is in immediate danger, the employee will notify the New Zealand Police on 111.
If an employee is dismissed before the threshold applies, the employee will be able to raise an unjustified dismissal grievance within the 90-day period. For example, if an employee on an existing employment agreement is dismissed 10 days before the end of the transitional period, they will be able to raise an unjustified dismissal claim after the end of the transitional period, so long as it is within the 90-day period.
If applicable, Reporting Guidelines for our funds can be found in the Essential documents list on the relevant Fund's webpages.
If appointed, you will not be in an employment relationship with either MBIE or the entity whose board you have been appointed to.
If approached directly by an MP, you will ensure that any such dealings are addressed and seen to be addressed impartially.
If information appears to us to have been gathered unlawfully, we may refer this to the Police.
If interpreters have not booked their test/s by 5pm (New Zealand time) on 30 June 2025, interpreters will need to pay for any second NAATI tests themselves. MBIE will not honour any outstanding entitlement notes after that time.
If people are not able to return to work, the welfare system remains available to support them. The Government is committed to ongoing reforms to improve the welfare system.
If the applicant is a body corporate or other entity , then: • Legal form and name • Registered office or principle place of business • Unique identifier (if applicable) • Contact details for dealing with the applicant
If the applicant wishes to use a tool different from DAS and DRAMA, the applicant must justify its use from a technical standpoint and MBIE must approve its use . 1.6 Verifying an ODMP’s compliance Regulation 13 prescribes requirements for an ODMP for the purposes of the Act. A summary of regulation 13 is set in 1.3 of this policy. The approach to verifying compliance with regulation 13 may vary. Currently, an application may take one of two paths: 1.6.1 The applicant may rely on an authorisation that has been treated by the Minister as satisfying New Zealand’s orbital debris mitigation requirements in accordance with section 51 of the Act, or an assessment by ESA has been completed. The authorisations that the Minister currently treats as satisfying the requirements are listed in section 1.5 of this policy. + Where an applicant has an authorisation from one of the listed agencies, or has had its orbital debris mitigation plan independently assessed by ESA as meeting its standards, no further assessment of the orbital debris mitigation plan is required. + For our own purposes of ensuring compliance with the terms of any granted licence or permit and as an evidence base should an on orbit collision occu r, the NZSA may still require a copy of the ODMP that was submitted in support of the overseas authorisation.
If the travel agent or wholesaler that you booked with is insolvent, in liquidation, in receivership, or in administration, you should contact the administrator of the company. Administrators of insolvent businesses may participate in the Scheme if they can meet all the eligibility criteria, and provide MBIE with a warranty that they are legally entitled and able to return refunds to New Zealand consumers.
If the travel agent successfully recovers a refund or credit, consumers should receive the full value of what is recovered.
If the working arrangement meets all 4 criteria, the worker is a
If this occurs, we will explain the reasons why. For more information please refer to sections
If we have a good reason for refusing a request for correction, you are entitled to request that a statement be attached to the information of the correction that was sought but not made.
If you an interpreter that has already booked a second test and are waiting to sit a second NAATI test, please contact the Language Assistance Services inbox at
If you are a new supplier to MBIE, we will need to set up an account for you in our finance system so that your invoices can be paid.
If you are a postal operator in New Zealand you can make changes to your details using this form:
If you are eligible contact
If you are in a position where you are required to give advice to the Government you have a responsibility to provide such advice honestly, impartially and in a full and frank manner, drawing attention to the possible consequences of policies or proposals.
If you are intending to become a postal operator, you should read the
If you are posting your request please ensure you have included name, your postal address or preferred email address, and specific details of the information you want.
If you are unhappy with our response, contact us in the first instance. You have the right to seek a review of the response by the
If you are unsatisfied with a response from MBIE to your complaint you can contact:
If you are unsure about your eligibility to join this contract, you should visit the Government procurement website, and apply for eligibility if necessary.
If you cannot find the information you need, you can email your query to Employment New Zealand.
If you do not have an active application, please login to your myNAATI portal and submit your application. Make sure to indicate that your application will be sponsored by MBIE and upload your entitlement note.
If you feel physically threatened or your personal safety is at risk, you should call your
If you feel that a personal relationship means that you cannot be objective in the performance of your duties, you will raise the matter with your manager immediately.
If you feel that we have not met our commitment, please let us know. We would also like to hear if you have had a good experience with us. You can do this through our online
If you find that your personal views or beliefs on an issue are in conflict with the Government to an extent that you cannot perform your duties in a politically neutral way, you will immediately raise this with your manager.
If you found the directory useful and would like it to be re-instated, please email us at
If you have a dispute and are unable to resolve it yourself, or are unhappy with the outcome, there are dispute resolution schemes who can help. Listed below are some of the schemes you can go to depending on the type of issue you have and the stage your dispute is at.
If you have a general question about rights and obligations related to leave and holiday entitlements you can find information for employers and employees on the Employment New Zealand website.
If you have a one-off or ad hoc requirement for face to face interpreting services, then you can choose any provider from the panel and contact them directly to request a booking. Using the information on this website and the Price Book. Choose from the panel a provider that can support the language groups and locations you need, and give you the best value for money.
If you have any concerns about wrongdoing (e.g. fraud, corruption, dishonesty, conflicts of interest etc) at our Ministry:
If you have any enquiries about our information gathering activities, or believe we have not acted in accordance with this statement, complete our concerns and feedback form.
If you have any feedback or an enquiry about the open data report, contact us at
If you have any queries about New Zealand's postal market contact us via email at
If you have any questions about the Electrifying Great Rides Fund,
If you have any questions about the Regional Events Promotion Fund, please contact
If you have any questions about the Regional Tourism Boost Fund please contact us on
If you have any questions about the Tourism Communities: Support, Recovery and Re-set Plan, please contact:
If you have any questions about the Tourism Data Partnerships Fund, email
If you have any questions about the consultation process contact us at
If you have any questions about the drop-in session, feel free to reach out to Professor Rachael Taylor - Cluster 1 (Health) NCP at
If you have any questions about this Code or what might be considered unacceptable behaviour under the Code or before you take a course of action that you are not entirely sure complies with the Code, please discuss these with your manager. If you are aware of behaviour occurring within MBIE that could contravene the Code, you must also raise this with your manager or another appropriate person.
If you have any questions email
If you have any questions email us at
If you have any questions for DOC on this component of the Tourism Communities: Support, Recovery and Re-set Plan, please contact:
If you have any questions, please email:
If you have questions about the review, you can get in touch with the team at
If you have questions about whether your current or former employer has calculated your leave payments correctly, or if you believe you may be eligible for a remediation payment, contact your employer in the first instance. Many employers have webpages about their Holidays Act remediation programmes which include contact details for employees.
If you have seen or suspect a breach of employment standards you can report it to the Labour Inspectorate.
If you have specific questions about the Holidays Act Review, email
If you haven't filled out the survey yet, you can do so by going to the MBIE website or the Space Trailblazer website, which is also got our phone number. If you'd like to give us a call.
If you know that the information was previously published and publicly available but you cannot find it on any of our websites or in the National Library collection, you can request a copy under Part 3 of the Public Records Act (Public access to information and records).
If you live in a shared property (eg, a multi-unit building) or a house accessed via shared property (eg, a shared driveway) and you have had problems connecting to UFB due to consent issues, we encourage you to contact your retail service provider to place a new connection order.
If you need to request for your personal information, you can directly contact the appropriate service provider at MBIE.
If you own intellectual property, you are responsible for monitoring the way it is used and protecting it against infringement.
If you provide dispute resolution services, GCDR resources are available to help you assess how well you are meeting best practice.
If you suspect a business is breaching the Easter trading laws, notify MBIE via our online reporting form.
If you want to check personal information that we hold, please write to:
If you want to learn more about good governance practice in the public sector, or conflicts of interest, guidance is available from the Office of the Auditor-General:
If you want to submit a complaint, use the guidance in our board appointment complaints policy.
If you wish to apply for a job with us, you will be required to register your details with us to
If you wish to become a postal operator in New Zealand you must complete an Application for Registration form (PO1):
If you wish to communicate directly with Ministers and MPs in your personal capacity about matters concerning MBIE you will first raise the matter with the Chief Executive.
If you wish to follow up your request, or are unhappy with our response,
If you wish to reproduce images, please contact us to discuss:
If you would like to contact our screen sector policy team please email us at:
If you would like to discuss MBIE's regulatory systems performance work programme, please contact us at
If you would like to discuss our regulatory systems performance work programme, contact us at
If your complaint to MBIE was in relation to your personal information, and you are unsatisfied with our response, you can contact:
If your questions are urgent, call 0800 20 90 20.
Image courtesy Harris Butt Architecture
Image courtesy of Paramount Pictures.
Image courtesy of Warner Bros Picture
Image courtesy of Warner Bros Pictures.
Imagine if scientists could accurately predict the severity of storms and other climate phenomena, giving those in their path potentially life-saving information.
Imche is the co-founder and Chief Executive of Auckland-based Outset Ventures, which works with deep-tech startups, especially those using intensive R&D or commercialization of university research. She has experience of engaging with young people to build investment and governance capabilities through mentorship. She will bring consideration of diversity and inclusion through her work with women founders, as well as understanding wider international trends and connections.
Immigration (Fiscal Sustainability and System Integrity) Amendment Bill
Immigration (Fiscal Sustainability and System Integrity) Amendment Bill: Approval for introduction [PDF 267KB]
Immigration (Fiscal Sustainability and System Integrity) Amendment Bill: Policy Proposals [PDF 223KB]
Immigration Act 2009 amendments
Immigration Advisers Authority
Immigration Compliance and Investigations
Immigration Design and Assurance. Leads the design of agreed policy, process, and platform change. Defining and delivering to requirements, as well as implementing and embedding change into the business. Ensures that INZ is being an effective regulator, meeting our legal and regulatory obligations.
Immigration NZ (INZ) Investigations presentations at Jakarta Centre for Law Enforcement Cooperation (JCLEC) and Bali Process Disruption Working Group.
Immigration NZ (INZ) completed initial research on international definitions and methodological measurements of people trafficking.
Immigration NZ (INZ) has held regular zoom meetings with community stakeholders, including leaders of the Muslim, South Asian, Filipino and Chinese communities throughout the year, regarding the protection of migrants and their rights in NZ.
Immigration NZ (INZ) has held virtual capacity-building sessions with Fiji immigration officials on topics including compliance and investigations.
Immigration NZ (INZ) review of employment rights information sent to migrants in visa approval letters.
Immigration New Zealand advisers' survey
Immigration New Zealand form requiring the approval of the General Manager, Enablement - 13 May 2022 [PDF 8.2MB]
Immigration New Zealand is headed by Deputy Secretary Alison McDonald.
Immigration New Zealand undertakes an annual survey of immigration advisers and lawyers to help evaluate and improve its customer service.
Immigration Risk and Border. Supports pre-and post-decision making for visa applications and manages pre-entry at the border, with accountability for all risk functions which crosscut the visa decision process.
Immigration Weekly Report for the period from 22 February to 28 February 2022 [PDF 618KB]
Immigration consultations
Immigration legislation reviews
Immigration regulatory system
Immigration research and data
Impact Analysis 35 MBIE prepared a regulatory impact statement which accompanied the May Cabinet paper.4 This paper does not seek any additional policy decisions so no further analysis is required. Officials will prepare further impact analysis to accompany the February Cabinet paper if further policy decisions are sought. 36 The Climate Implications of Policy Assessment (CIPA) team was consulted in May 2024 and confirmed that the CIPA requirements do not apply to the policy decisions which the consultation document is based on. Population Implications 37 The content of the consultation document does not have any direct population implications, but the consultation is an opportunity to consult with relevant population groups and ask targeted questions to understand their views on the proposals and how their interests and rights could be affected. 38 MBIE officials consulted with five other agencies during the selection process to ensure relevant population groups are represented in the consultation. The Ministry of Health, Te Puni Kōkiri, Ministry for Disabled People, Ministry for Pacific Peoples and Ministry for Ethnic Communities provided recommendations which MBIE considered alongside other factors when selecting the 100 participants for targeted consultation. 4 The 2024 RIS is an addendum to the full 2020 RIS to reflect policy changes. I N C O N F I D E N C E 6 3u22ohzj22 2024-09-25 17:37:38 Confidential advice to Government I N C O N F I D E N C E Human Rights 39 The proposals in the Bill have all been assessed as appearing consistent with the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990 (NZBORA) and the Human Rights Act 1993 . The exception is the decision to include a pro-rata approach to providing sick leave entitlement which has not yet been assessed. A full assessment of that proposal, along with other options for further policy changes, will be completed by the Ministry of Justice for consistency with the NZBORA before I seek final policy decisions. Consultation 40 The following Public and non-Public Service departments and agencies were consulted on this paper: Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet (Policy Advisory Group), PCO, the Treasury, the Public Service Commission, Inland Revenue, Office of the Privacy Commissioner, Ministry of Education, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Justice, Ministry of Social Development, Ministry for Culture and Heritage, Department of Internal Affairs, Ministry of Defence, Ministry for Women, Ministry of Disabled People, Te Puni Kōkiri, Te Arawhiti, Ministry for Pacific Peoples, Oranga Tamariki, Ministry for Ethnic Communities, New Zealand Police and the New Zealand Defence Force. 41 Treasury provided feedback on the need for sufficient engagement with the health and education sectors to ensure that the proposed changes are workable for them, given the historical difficulties and potential fiscal costs that could arise from implementing changes. Potential impacts for the government as an employer will be assessed through a separate questionnaire (refer to paragraph 32) and, in addition, MBIE intends to continue direct engagement with Health New Zealand (Health NZ) and the Ministry of Education.
Impact Summary: Security officers and Part 6A of the Employment Relations Act 2000 [PDF 419KB]
Impact Summary: Wheel clamping [PDF 307KB]
Impact statement informing final Cabinet decisions on amendments to the Outer Space and High-altitude Activities (2017) orbital debris mitigation requirements.
Impacts Assessment against objectives Manag es risks of high altitude activity efficiently and effectively The requirement for a license is not disproportiona te to the level of risk Reduce compliance costs for licensed activity that is low risk Option one: No exemptions No exemptions would mean a large volume of low risk activity would be caught by this approach which is of no interest to regulators, and was is not intended under the Act as a means of managing risk. In addition, no exemptions policy would create a burden on the regulator which may detract from their ability to focus resources on the high -risk activity.
Impacts of Economic Transitions on Firms, Workers, Regions and Households [PDF 742KB]
Impacts of circular approaches on emissions, jobs, and other factors
Impacts on employees and employers 52. The Taskforce’s recommendations will result in employees receiving slightly more leave pay, on average, than they would under the current Act. Employees that have variable working arrangements and complex remuneration structures are most likely to receive an increase in annual holidays and leave payments. It is estimated that between 60,600 and 580,400 employees, or 3 to 27 per cent of all New Zealand employees, fall within these categories and are most likely to work in the ‘health care and social assistance’, ‘accommodation and food services’ and ‘public administration and safety’ sectors.
Impacts on people experiencing homelessness
Implement community-based job coaches for young jobseekers.
Implement education initiatives that will lift achievement and prepare students to pursue aerospace careers.
Implement evidence-based instruction in literacy and mathematics. (MOE)
Implementation and evaluation
Implementation of any regulatory and non-regulatory measures.
Implementation of joint INZ-ENZ migrant exploitation allegation triage and reporting model
Implementation of the New Zealand Screen Production Grant: Cabinet paper
Implementation of the package
Implementing a ban on new fossil-fuel baseload electricity generation
Implementing the Fuel Quality Monitoring Programme
Implementing the Tourism Strategy
Implementing the recommendations
Implications for businesses
Implications for the G overnment as an employer 8. As an employer, the Government will incur costs due to the increased leave entitlements and the use of new leave payment methodologies provided for by the Bill. Free and frank opinions Confidential advice to Government
Implications for the regulator 57. For the Labour Inspectorate and associated functions within MBIE, implementing the legislative changes effectively would have resourcing implications that could not be met within current baselines (without compromising other regulatory functions) . In particular:
Import and export restriction agreements
Imported goods subject to anti-dumping and countervailing duties
Improve access to justice for claimants
Improve cooperation in investigations across government agencies
Improve information for victims of exploitation and vulnerable groups
Improve international cooperation and partnership
Improve our understanding of exploitation to enable better targeting of actions and measures
Improve the management of high-risk projects and increase the transparency of reporting in the Regional Development portfolio.
Improved customer and user experience
Improvements are required, it is not perfect. The essential oils is a great sector and there is interest in companies doing things, but for all of these 30 identified, is this platform growth ready, where are the execution gaps? What do we need to do to get this thing really humming? We looked across a range of common metrics across all of the sectors and essentials oils is doing well in some areas and not so well in others as a guideline.
Improving efficiency in the inspection process: Discussion document
Improving health and safety assessments
Improving our diesel resilience
Improving resource efficiency and the circularity of economies for a greener world
Improving the employment relations and standards system: Fair Pay Agreements [PDF 1MB]
Improving the sustainability of freedom camping in New Zealand.
In 2008 Professor Long and his team was awarded the Cooper medal by the Royal Society of New Zealand for research to develop a commercial process for the manufacture of superconductor Roebel cable.
In 2012, the Government amended the Fair Trading Act 1986 (by inserting section 28A) to allow for disclosure regulations to be made in relation to third-party fundraisers.
In 2015 we commissioned an independent survey of the repairs to 101 randomly selected earthquake-damaged Canterbury homes.
In 2016 we consulted on disclosure regulations for third-party fundraisers.
In 2016, Cabinet decided all recommendations contained in the Independent Review report on ACC dispute resolution processes would be addressed.
In 2016, the Joint Working Group on Pay Equity Principles (JWG) provided recommendations to guide the implementation of pay equity. It noted that the current framework in the Equal Pay Act 1972 relied on the courts to determine principles for assessing pay equity issues and setting pay rates.
In 2016, the former Minister of Science and Innovation, the former Minister of Finance and the former Minister for State-owned Enterprises commissioned our Ministry and Treasury to review policy settings for open access to weather data.
In 2016, we arranged for a report to be produced determining if there was a level of government-held weather data which should be opened up for public access (over and above data already available) to better stimulate innovation and promote economic growth.
In 2016, we commissioned research on the earthquake performance of non-structural elements: 2 detailed reports, and a small survey of 20 buildings in Wellington and Auckland.
In 2017, external consultants PwC and Experian produced the report Weather Permitting: Review of open access to weather data in New Zealand (Weather Permitting).
In 2018 the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade and our Ministry commissioned the New Zealand Institute of Economic Research (NZIER) to prepare brief international regulatory cooperation case studies focused on drawing out the lessons learnt.
In 2018, New Zealand acceded to the Convention on the Registration of Objects Launched into Outer Space (the Registration Convention), in time for the first launch of spacecraft from New Zealand.
In 2018, the Government brought together industry, business and worker representatives to design a model that allows collective bargaining in the screen industry. The Screen Industry Workers Act 2022 implements their recommendations.
In 2019 MBIE signed an agreement to collaborate with the Environmental Defense Fund and its subsidiary MethaneSAT LLC, who are leading the mission.
In 2019 she was a recipient of the Alan Blizzard Award for teaching in Canada and in 2021 was awarded a Rutherford Discovery Fellowship to explore higher education, neoliberalism and equity in Aotearoa New Zealand.
In 2019, Cabinet set out principles which guide decisions on space activities authorised by New Zealand.
In 2019, Regional Skills Leadership Groups (RSLG) were established to support the development of workforce plans for regions. These Regional Workforce Plans (RWPs) were to be informed by regional economic development priorities to ensure businesses attract people with the right skills to the right place.
In 2019, we started asking applicants applying for science and innovation funding to provide us with the ORCID iDs of team members in key roles.
In 2020 the minimum sick leave entitlement was five days per year. The agreed accumulation process was for eligible employees to become entitled to one day of sick leave on their first day of employment, and an additional day after every mont h of employment until the minimum five-day sick leave entitlement was reached after four months.
In 2020, 61.4% of school leavers enrolled in level 3 and above tertiary education, a 5.4% increase from the previous year.
In 2020, Cabinet accepted the Holidays Act Taskforce ’s
In 2020, MBIE commissioned an independent review of the early implementation of the scheme to identify how it was working so far and whether any parts of the process could be improved. The review comprised interviews with a range of stakeholders and focused on the experience of businesses and their advisors through the application process for the RDTI.
In 2020, Tourism New Zealand pivoted to domestic marketing as a response to the international border closures from COVID-19. The Government made this decision to support the industry in continuing to operate.
In 2020, when it endorsed the Taskforce’s recommendations, Cabinet directed MBIE to develop a transition plan and report back to Cabinet [CAB - 20 - MIN - 0100]. MBIE undertook this work as part of the 2021 - 2022 policy design process.
In 2021 Haritina Mogosanu applied to be an astronaut at the European Space Agency (ESA). Read her story below.
In 2021, 55.8% of all school leavers achieved level 3 or UE standard, a 3.8% decrease from 2020.
In 2021, the Government asked a Tripartite Working Group, made up of union, employer and public sector representatives, to examine the issue and report back with recommendations.
In 2022, Business and Economic Research Limited (BERL) completed a truncated programme of work for a report for evaluating the economic effects of the MOUs for the 5% uplift of the New Zealand Screen Production Grant.
In 2022, the Future of Work Tripartite Forum commissioned 2 research projects, both designed to support a better understanding of how the transition to a high-wage, low-emissions economy is likely to impact businesses and workers.
In 2022, the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs commissioned an investigation into changes to credit laws introduced on 1 December 2021. This has led to further amendments to the Credit Contracts and Consumer Finance Regulations 2004 and the Responsible Lending Code. The first tranche of changes came into force on 7 July 2022, and the second tranche are in force on 4 May 2023.
In 2023 MBIE commissioned research on the potential for greenhouse gas emissions savings and other impacts from circular approaches in the New Zealand context.
In 2023, 5 Kiwi interns completed internships at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California, USA.
In 2023, INZ plans to provide assistance with ongoing training activities with Pacific agencies to support investigation and prosecution efforts.
In 2023, the previous Government announced its intention to address modern slavery by introducing new legislation that would require organisations and businesses to be transparent about their operations and supply chains through a new public register.
In 2024 we took part in a bilateral Space Dialogue with the United States Government. Representatives from both governments discussed how we can strengthen our existing bilateral space cooperation.
In 2024, Connecting Now helped facilitate conversations in over 120 languages, with an average connection time of less than 1 minute.
In April and May 2022 consultation was carried out on proposed legislation to address modern slavery and worker exploitation in supply chains both in New Zealand and internationally.
In August 2017 Government approved the piloting of the Community Organisation Refugee Sponsorship Category (CORS) Category as an alternative form of admission for up to 25 refugees in 2017/18.
In August 2018, the Taskforce published an issues paper that set out its understanding of the key issues that employers, employees, and payroll providers face in trying to implement the Holidays Act 2003. The Taskforce considered feedback from stakeholders on the issues paper as it developed its final recommendations.
In August, Cabinet agreed to exempt BNPL providers from unreasonable fee provisions in the CCCFA. This was given effect by the Credit Contracts and Consumer Finance (Buy Now, Pay Later Exemptions) Amendment Regulations 2024 which commenced on 1 November 2024. This decision was made in response to concerns about the unintended impacts the CCCFA fee provisions would have on the ability of BNPL providers to calculate and charge default fees, for the overall viability of BNPL products.
In Canada, sales revenues from remanufacturing and comprehensive refurbishment generate an estimated CAD$5-6 billion annually. The International Resource Panel has found that when compared to manufacturing a new product, remanufacturing can reduce the need for new materials from 80 to 98% and reduce 57 to 87% of the energy needs and associated greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions related to their manufacturing.
In Confidence Office of the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety Chair, Cabinet Economic Development Committee
In December 2015 we consulted on the proposed Accident Compensation Appeal Tribunal. Submissions did not support establishing a Tribunal and it was decided not to progress establishing a specialist appeal tribunal.
In December 2015, we released a discussion document seeking feedback on 2 main areas:
In December 2018 the Taskforce provided an interim report to the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety on progress with the review of the Holidays Act.
In December 2018 we applied 2 adjustments to the data to ensure the Auckland regional fuel tax is reflected in the data:
In December 2018, we made adjustments to account for the introduction of the Auckland regional fuel tax on 1 July 2018.
In December 2018, we provided a progress update to the ACC Minister on our progress implementing the recommendations. This report provides transparency about the work agencies have done in response to the review. It does not signal an end to work being done to improve the dispute resolution process. This is an on-going commitment for ACC.
In December 2020, the Cabinet agreed to include security officers in Schedule 1A.
In December 2021, the Energy and Resources Minister decided a new 5-year energy efficiency and conservation strategy is to be developed. This will replace the existing strategy, rather than rolling it over for another 5 years.
In December 2024, officials were directed by the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety to take a new approach to reforming the Holidays Act, with a focus on simplicity, improving workability and reducing compliance costs. The approach involves designing an hours-based accrual model for annual leave and considering whether other models may be best-suited for more complex work arrangements.
In Europe, one of the actions of the Circular Economy Action Plan is a proposal for companies to substantiate their environmental claims using evidence.
In February 2022, the Government announced the formal commencement of a $47 million package of investments to bolster the capacity in wireless networks in rural areas which is expected to benefit up to 47,000 rural households and businesses as a Rural Capacity Upgrade (RCU). Work is in progress on new towers and upgrades to existing towers (and some fibre backhaul) to improve network performance in rural areas.
In Hamburg, my test group was about 30 people split into 2 classrooms, and we had a few days to meet each other as we stayed at the same hotel, and also meet the people who came there before and after us. What I found absolutely amazing was that we all got along very well. We were supposed to compete against each other, yet it was an extraordinary sense of camaraderie between us. We stay in touch on Whatsapp and still talk to each other. There were test pilots, doctors, aerospace engineers, biologists, one astronomer, and a few software engineers in my group. There was someone who works at SpaceX in the US and I was the only science communicator/ astrobiologist in our group.
In January 2018, the JWG was reconvened to provide further recommendations that address
In July 2014 we released a request for proposals (RFP) for the hosting of the centre to the 7 research organisations who participated in the workshop.
In July 2016, we signed a joint statement of principle supporting the adoption and use of ORCID iDs in New Zealand with other New Zealand organisations representing the scientific and research community.
In July 2017, the Minister for Communications appointed Utilities Disputes Limited as the approved scheme provider.
In July 2021 we asked for feedback on a proposed subject and focus areas for the Briefing. The feedback we received helped us narrow our focus to purpose-led business and use of blockchain technology. The full summary of feedback is available here.
In July 2021, the previous Government increased the minimum sick leave entitlement from five to 10 days per year. The accumulation needs to be adjusted to reflect this. Adjust the accumulation profile for sick leave t o reflect the increase in sick leave entitlement from five to 10 days: • For employees eligible for sick leave from the first day of employment : 10 days ’ sick leave accumulates over a timeframe of six months , two days on day one, a further four days after three months and a further four days (i. e. the full entitlement) after six months. • For employees eligible for sick leave after three months of employment : sick leave accumulates over a timeframe of three months, six days when they become eligible and then a further four days (i.e. the full entit lement) after six months . • For employees eligible for sick leave after six months of employment: full entitlement of 10 days is provided upon becoming eligible (aligned with the current six -month timeframe).
In July 2022 a webinar for government procurement officials was held on Modern Slavery and the direction of travel regarding the developing legislation, to raise awareness and address questions and concerns from procurement practitioners across the public sector. The event had 161 attendees representing over 30 agencies and entities.
In July 2023 regulations setting out infringement fees and fines came into law.
In June 2016, Cabinet approved the piloting of the Community Organisation Refugee Sponsorship Category (CORS) as an alternative form of admission for up to 25 refugees in 2017/18.
In June 2020, the Minister of Tourism set up the independent New Zealand Tourism Futures Taskforce (the Taskforce) following the significant change to global travel and tourism in New Zealand as a result of COVID-19.
In March 2018 the State Services Commissioner appointed Doug Martin to conduct an inquiry into the use of external security consultants by Southern Response Earthquake Services Limited and MBIE.
In May 2021, the Government announced the design of the Fair Pay Agreements system. The design was informed by the Fair Pay Agreements Working Group and public consultation, as well as involvement from the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions and BusinessNZ.
In May 2022 we asked for feedback on a draft of the Briefing. We shaped the content of the final Briefing through the contributions of those who wrote submissions, and met with us in person and virtually in this second phase. The full consultation summary is available here as an accessible web version and PDF.
In May 2022, 2 new trails were granted Great Ride status and joined the New Zealand Cycle Trails network, increasing the number of Great Rides to 23.
In May 2022, INZ travelled to Fiji to assist and coordinate the delivery of ongoing training packages for Fijian authorities. INZ assisted the Fijian immigration service with a local investigation, as well as operational prevention activities.
In May 2024, Cabinet approved the introduction of the Bills, agreed to rescind or amend some previous Cabinet decisions, and agreed to include some additional matters in the Bills.
In New Zealand 2M has been providing interpreting services under the Open Syndicated Panel Agreement for face-to-face interpreting services with the population target of people with limited or no English language proficiency who require access to public services and information as well as visitors to New Zealand needing access to essential services and information.
In New Zealand, the layout design of semi-conductors and integrated circuits is protected by the Layout Designs Act 1994.
In October 2014 the Science Board selected Massey University as the centre host, following the RFP process.
In October 2018, MBIE and the German Aerospace Centre (DLR) signed a Letter of Intent at the International Astronautical Congress (IAC) to enable joint research collaboration, focused on space systems, earth observation technologies and applications, transport technologies and energy technologies.
In October 2019, the Government released a discussion paper that sought feedback on a range of options for the design of a Fair Pay Agreements system. The consultation closed 27 November 2019.
In October 2019, we consulted on a set of proposed changes that will prevent migrant exploitation, protect exploited migrants, and better enforce appropriate working conditions and immigration obligations. Consultation closed on 27 November.
In October 2021, MBIE launched a new service for government agencies to access face to face interpreting services.
In October 2022, the Government agreed to apply the Credit Contracts and Consumer Finance Act 2003 (CCCFA) to BNPL. MBIE opened consultation on 19 December 2022 to seek feedback on the proposed regulations, including a proposed threshold of $600 and what will apply above the threshold. Stakeholders were invited to provide feedback from 19 December 2022 to 10 March 2023.
In October 2024, the Government agreed to an all-of-government approach to online financial scams. This has informed the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs to lead engagement measures across government, with industry, and internationally.
In September 2018, Cabinet agreed to progress an action item in the coalition agreement between Labour and New Zealand First - to take serious action on migrant exploitation, particularly of international students.
In a circular economy, products and materials are kept in circulation through processes like maintenance, reuse, refurbishment, remanufacture, recycling, and composting. Downstream efforts such as waste and resource management are usually the first areas to be addressed in domestic circular economy policy, though more significant shifts occur with policies focussed on upstream waste prevention and resource recovery. Some examples of key policy and regulatory areas include:
In accordance with the Privacy Act 2020, please be aware that your personal information is being collected through the screen share function and the recording of the screen share session. This is to ensure that Client Services Advisors can assist you with your query and to ensure that we can resolve any disputes that may arise following a screen share session. It may also be used for quality and training purposes.
In addition to her MBIE responsibilities, Carolyn is Chair of the Public Sector Auckland Career Board, and is a member of the Victoria University of Wellington Business School Advisory Board.
In addition to launch and facility licences, we also conduct assessments for payloads and high-altitude vehicles.
In addition to providing information specified in the application forms, you may be required to fill out the APP400 or APP800 forms.
In addition to the challenges that may be experienced by all New Zealand youth in their transition to adulthood, migrant youth may face additional challenges related to settling in a new country and adapting to a new culture.
In addition to the co-chairs and independent members, the Taskforce includes:
In addition to this exceptional work experience opportunity, interns will be asked to give back to the wider New Zealand aerospace sector and NASA through outreach and social media activities.
In addition, international screen productions can:
In addition, the wider public will also get an opportunity to make submissions at Select Committee stage.
In addition, this report includes monitoring data on employment outcomes for quota refugee arrivals from 2013/14 to 2018/19.
In addition, we reserve the right to remove content posted on our pages that:
In all these situations, the parties involved generally have a range of options for managing or resolving the dispute. They may try to:
In broad terms, entanglement is the mind-bending quantum mechanics phenomenon where two photons behave as one unit even when physically separated. You cannot measure something about one photon without affecting the other photon in the pair, which is what makes it secure.
In carrying out the review, the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE), as the administering agen cy of the Act, will assess the Act's operation and effectiveness through, inter alia, considering the following: • Alignment of provisions with intent ( eg do the provisions in the Act allow the purposes to be met?); • Efficient ( eg do they impose minimum com pliance costs on the regulated entities and agencies involved in administering the Act, and do they result in the provision of timely and comprehensive information to inform decision -making?); • Certain and predictable ( eg does the regime provide a sufficie nt level of certainty and predictability to regulated entities?); • Flexible ( eg given that this is an area of rapid technology change, is the Act sufficiently technology neutral); • Transparent (for the regulated entities and the general public).
In considering how to collect information we take into account a range of factors, including:
In considering how to structure the safety argument, Figure 1 provides a high-level overview of some of the questions that applicants should ask when considering and planning the development of the safety case .
In considering the national interest, the Act notes that the Minister may have regard to:
In early 2023, severe weather events affected large parts of the North Island, causing widespread and devastating damage to buildings and communities.
In early March 2019, MBIE released a discussion document on the issues related to ticket reselling. It was based on initial research and some stakeholder interviews, as well as potential options to address the consumer concerns around ticket reselling. You can access this document in the table further down this page.
In essence, you are free to copy, distribute and adapt the material, as long as you attribute it to the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment and abide by other licence terms.
In general terms, a 'just transition' in New Zealand is a strategy to move a region toward a low carbon future. It is about a region leading their own transition to ensure that the impacts and opportunities that may arise from the transition are more evenly distributed.
In general, if an agency has previously signed-up to an All of Government or Syndicated contract (including Telephone and Video Interpreting) then it is eligible to join the OSA as a Participating Agency.
In general, you can only freedom camp on local authority land if your vehicle is certified self-contained. Check in with your local authority to find out more:
In healthcare, new rules mean our doctors and scientists could more easily research, develop and manufacture innovative therapies in New Zealand, like using the patient's own cells to help fight against cancer. Or, scientists could develop a type of pine tree that meets our forestry needs but doesn't spread. This would help to protect and preserve our native environments.
In late 2024, open letters were issued to the telecommunications, and digital platforms sectors. These letters urged industry-led initiatives and developments, including improving consumer protection and redress measures.
In late December 2023, we briefed you on the
In mid-2017, we sought feedback on a discussion paper examining the concept of impact as it relates to the science system.
In order to be added to Schedule 1A certain criteria must be met
In order to be added to Schedule 1A, certain criteria must be met
In order to benefit from this funding, interpreters must have a MBIE issued entitlement note and
In order to carry out our law enforcement, regulatory compliance and protective security functions, we may use the information we hold as evidence, and for analysis, risk assessment, audit and/or monitoring purposes.
In order to ensure there are interpreters with NAATI credentials in New Zealand, MBIE managed the Interpreter Standards Transition Support (ISTS) package for a three-year period from 1 July 2021. Registration closed 31 January 2024. The timeframe for interpreters who registered with ISTS towards the end of the registration period to complete their accreditation has been extended through to 30 June 2025.
In order to manage these risks, MBIE undertakes a sensitive technologies risk assessment on those projects that are recommended for MBIE Science and Innovation funding. Higher levels of assessed risk require specific risk mitigation strategies to be put in place. These will normally form part of the funding contract conditions of a project.
In order to reach the minimum $50,000 grant threshold, the minimum total cost of the project must be $100,000
In our Endeavour Fund funding applications, applicants are required to specify the Australian and New Zealand Standard Research Classification (ANZSRC) Fields of Research (FoR) and Socio-Economic Objectives (SEO) research codes that classify their proposed research.
In parallel to the MBIE-led national interest risk review process, the Government Communications Security Bureau (GCSB) and New Zealand Secret Intelligence Service (NZSIS) undertake a National Security Assessment on each payload and provide a briefing to the Minister(s) responsible for the GCSB and NZSIS.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, New Zealand set up a Managed Isolation and Quarantine (MIQ) system out of necessity to protect our people.
In selecting what control is reasonable, applicants should give consideration to: ȓ the likelihood of a public safety risk being ȓ what is known, or what ought reasonably be known, realised; and about the risk; and ȓ the consequence of the public safety risk being ȓ what is known, or what ought reasonably be known, realised; and about how the risk can be controlled. Applicants must be able to demonstrate an identification of any public safety risks outlining: ȓ the likelihood and consequence of the public ȓ the monitoring activities that will be undertaken safety risk; to ensure your controls remain effective; and ȓ the control measures considered and used ȓ who is responsible for ensuring that controls to eliminate or minimise the risks; are implemented. MBIE encourages applicants to check, consider and use where appropriate to the operation any commonly accepted control measures (such as industry standards) to control the risks. Applicants should still ensure that any residual risk is managed appropriately. Where a decision is made not to implement a control that could improve public safety, (if required) applicants must be able to demonstrate the rationale for not implementing it. Some risks that the public could be exposed to may require them to be managed in accordance with more prescriptive regulations (hazardous substances might be an example). Applicants must be aware of, and apply these as required. Figure 2 represents an accepted framework for safety risk management. The complexity of the risk assessment methodology that is used to assess a public safety risk will depend on the nature of the task being performed or the public safety needs to be managed. To give the regulator confidence that applicants understand the public safety risks they create, a copy of your public safety risk assessment should be provided when the safety case is submitted. ASSESS Engage with workers and stakeholders, identify your hazards and risks, determine your critical or priority risks, identify possible controls CONTROL IMPROVE Implement controls, educate identify control and systemic SAFETY RISK on correct use of controls, weakness, feedback to MANAGEMENT Review data and reports, give priority to controls the business, effect that protect multiple meaningful change persons simultaneously MONITOR Encourage reporting, engage with workers and stakeholders, undertake effective assurance activities including audit and investigation
In situations where RDP is currently straightforward to calculate, the aim is that there would be little change fr om how payments are currently calculated. The consolidated calculation is designed to be applicable to both waged and salaried workers.
In some circumstances, the formal court system may be an appropriate channel or a last recourse when other approaches have been unsuccessful.
In some circumstances, you may also need to provide additional information by completing the APP400 and APP800 forms, which are provided below.
In some subsectors, opportunities exist to use more of what we produce locally. In some cases, this could make businesses more resilient and create skilled jobs. Clear policies on managing domestic versus global emissions need to guide these transitions.
In the 2016/17 year, 5,243 migrants from the Pacific were approved for residence. The number of Pacific migrants approved for residence has remained stable over the last 5 years, increasing by 4% between 2012/13 and 2016/17. This growth was driven by the increase in the International/Humanitarian visa stream approvals.
In the first half of 2022 OT has been working closely with the Pacific Justice Sector Programme to identify models of practice within the Pacific judiciary which prevents children being trafficked and exploited. The programme went live in May, introduced by the Lord Chief Justice of the Tonga Supreme Court, and it is hoped that this model will encourage other Pacific nations to follow suit.
In the next sections, in all of the 3 reports, we looked at some of the activities, as in this particular chart where some of the international acquirers are buying into the New Zealand market.
In the years prior to COVID-19, the number of freedom campers steadily increased. Communities raised concerns about the environmental impact of freedom campers and the cost of hosting them, particularly those visitors staying in cars or vans that did not have a toilet. Poor visitor behaviour was starting to impact Brand New Zealand.
In this section are in-depth analytical pieces of research into projecting how markets operate.
In this section you will find all our consultations, both current and closed. Your views are important to us and we encourage you to have your say.
In this section you will find data and statistics about rental bonds.
In this section you will find data and statistics about rental bonds. Information about housing and urban development is available from the Ministry of Housing and Urban Development website. Tenancy information for landlords and tenants is available from the Tenancy website.
In-kind contributions are not permitted.
In-kind contributions may be allowed, but will be considered on a case by case bases. Contact MBIE for any questions regarding in-kind contributions.
Include the + symbol when dialling.
Including an 18 - month implementation period in the exposure draft will provide an opportunity to test whether this timeframe is sufficient as a general commencemen t date for
Incorporate the views of Pacific Island countries and workers, and the impacts on Pacific labour markets
Incorporated Societies Act 2022
Increase the level of cross-subsidisation of owners of motorcycles to the cost of injuries to motorcyclists from 28% to 37% with a staged increase of 33% from 1 July 2026 and 37% from 1 July 2027.
Increase the threshold for medical and treatment costs used in Experience Rating calculations from $500 to $750.
Increased access to some leave entitlements
Increased certainty for contractors coming
Increased diesel reserves to improve resilience
Increased onshore diesel reserves to improve resilience
Increasing the minimum sick leave entitlement
Increasing the minimum sick leave entitlement [PDF 134KB]
Independent Police Conduct Authority
Independent Research Organisations
Independent Review of the Acclaim Otago (Inc) July 2015 Report into Accident Compensation Dispute Resolution Processes
Independent Taskforce on Workplace Health and Safety
Independent and privately owned
Independent dispute resolution providers in New Zealand: a 2015 snapshot
Independent dispute resolution providers in New Zealand: a 2015 snapshot [PDF 368KB]
Independent research organisations have internal capability for carrying out research, science, technology or related activities with ownerships and governance independent of Government.
Independent review into the Accredited Employer Work Visa (AEWV)
Independent review of WorkSafe in relation to Whakaari/White Island
Independent reviews of WorkSafe
Independent reviews of WorkSafe in relation to Whakaari/White Island and a Strategic Baseline review, assessing whether WorkSafe is managing its resources efficiently and effectively are available here.
Independently qualified pool inspectors website
Index of registers Entity registers: Companies Incorporated Societies Limited Partnerships Friendly Societies Credit Unions Building Societies Other registers:19 Auditors Insolvency Practitioners Retirement Villages Disclose Personal Property Securities Financial Service Providers Other services: Financial Statements filing
Indicative timeline for change
Indigenous Innovation: Contributing to economic growth through distinctive research and development.
Individuals were able to identify up to three ethnicities and as many project team roles as they identified with meaning that some individuals may have been counted more than once.
Indo-Pacific Economic Framework for Prosperity (2024)
Indo-Pacific Economic Framework for Prosperity (IPEF) Supply Chain Agreement
Industries identified for the development of an Industry Transformation Plan are those with significant potential to contribute to a high productivity, high wage, lower emissions economy.
Industry Focus Group members
Industry Transformation Plans
Industry Transformation Plans (ITPs) took a high-intensity, high-engagement approach to industry policy, with the purpose of setting a transformative vision and action plan for key sectors in the New Zealand economy.
Industry funders the Dairy Companies Association of New Zealand, the Meat Industry Association and Zespri have committed $2.05 million so far.
Industry transformation plans
Ineligible Research Objectives
Influencing the design of products and assets for durability and reuse can result in significant waste elimination and efficient material circulation. Initiatives such as digital product passports can support supply-chain transparency and life cycle information sharing, which complement broader circular economy initiatives.
Informal flexible working is where flexible working does not affect remuneration or leave. It does not require a change to your employment agreement. Informal/Ad hoc flexible working is agreed with your people leader on a case-by-case basis and does not follow a regular pattern of working hours or days or location.
Informal/ad hoc flexible working
Information about migrant exploitation published to MBIE website in 13 languages.
Information about our new data processing pipeline
Information about payload capabilities • Overview of the payload and its subsystems, and the payload capabilities and intended uses • Summary of manoeuvring capability, if any • If the management, oversight or control of the payload or its operation (including the ground segment) is being sub -contracted , the : o Name 22
Information about payloads with remote sensing capability • A description of payloa d sensors and summary of their capability including : o Resolution, field of view, and field of regard o On-board storage and processing capabilities o Geolocation accuracy o Persistence
Information about short-term accommodation activity in New Zealand at national, regional, and lower levels
Information about space events for students across Aotearoa, competitions, and educational resources.
Information about the New Zealand Screen Sector
Information about the Screen Industry Workers Act 2022
Information about the high- altitude vehicle and purpose of launch or launches • A summary of the mission and purposes of each HAV launch, including: o a description of the HAV (including name and type of vehicle, payload capacity and capabilities of the HAV) o proposed flight path or flight plan (if applicable) o If known at the time of application, anticipated launch windows o proposed launch site (including for multiple launch sites if applicable) o anticipated duration of the mission o intended fl ight level band or range
Information about the new Matariki public holiday, its principles and values.
Information about the type of funding available and eligibility criteria.
Information and Communication Technology 2017 report
Information and Communications Technology
Information and advice on consumer issues
Information and communications technologies enhance innovation and productivity across the economy. To realise this potential, we work to ensure that telecommunications markets operate efficiently and communications infrastructure is well developed.
Information and data about research, science and innovation.
Information and tools to help you design policy, legislation and services for dispute resolution using a best practice lens are linked below. This can also help guide you in establishing a new scheme or reviewing an existing scheme.
Information collected directly
Information collected from another person or agency
Information collection to prevent significant harm
Information for consumers about your rights if your car has been clamped is available on our
Information for consumers seeking refunds or credits for cancelled overseas travel
Information for employers
Information for employers and employees on shop trading days
Information for employers in the sex industry about who can be a sex worker in New Zealand and the responsibilities of employers. Translated into simplified Chinese, Thai, Korean and Portugese.
Information for local authorities
Information for prospective Certification Authorities and vehicle inspectors
Information for prospective certification authorities and vehicle inspectors
Information for vehicle owners
Information for workers in the sex industry about who can be a sex worker in New Zealand, where to get help and more information. Translated into simplified Chinese, Thai, Korean and Portugese.
Information from submissions was analysed and included in the report.
Information gathering concerns and feedback
Information gathering for regulatory compliance, law enforcement and protective security purposes
Information gathering for regulatory compliance, law enforcement and protective security purposes.
Information gathering must be authorised according to our internal authorisation processes. These processes may vary within various teams in MBIE according to their regulatory function and the severity of the potential harm caused by the non-compliance, offending or threat. Each of our internal authorisation processes, and the related activities, are regularly reviewed.
Information is available on the Ministry for Ethnic Communities website.
Information is stored, accessed and retained in accordance with our Privacy Policy, Information and Records Management Policy, ICT Acceptable Use Policy, and the MBIE Code of Conduct. It also needs to be in compliance with the Public Service Commission code of conduct, and applicable laws including the Privacy Act 2020, and the Public Records Act 2005.
Information on Budget announcements for science and innovation-related funding.
Information on how GST (if any) has been included
Information on how we process complaints and what we need from you.
Information on previous Budget announcements for science and innovation-related funding.
Information on the council
Information on the current Commissioner
Information on this page was updated in March 2025 following an internal audit of payload permits issued.
Information on what is needed to certify your vehicle (including answers to technical questions), and where to go to get certified, is available on the Plumbers, Gasfitters and Drainlayers Board website:
Information on your rights when buying a product and service
Information related to an applicant’s fitness to hold a licence Whether the applicant or a person who is to have or is likely to have cont rol over the exercise of the rights under the licence: • has been charged with or convicted of any offence in New Zealand or in any other jurisdiction, • has had an aviation document under the Civil Aviation Act or regulations made under the Civil Aviation Ac t suspended or revoked (other than a revocation at the request of the applicant), or had conditions imposed on an aviation document, or • has received notice from the C ivil Aviation Authority of a proposed adverse decision, • has ever had a licence, permit or authorisation for the same or substantially similar activity by a foreign regulatory body suspended, denied or revoked and the reason s given and if so details of what and when
Information related to an applicant’s fitness to hold a licence Whether the applicant or a person who is to have or is likely to have control over the exercise of the rights under the licence: • has been charged with or convicted of any offence in New Zealand or any other jurisdiction, or • has had an aviation document under the C ivil Aviation Act or regulations made under the C ivil Aviation Act suspended or revoked (other than a revocation at the requ est of the applicant), or had conditions imposed on an aviation document, or • has received notice from the Civil Aviation Authority of a proposed adverse decision, or • has ever had a licence, permit or authorisation for the same or substantially similar act ivity by a foreign regulatory body suspended, denied or revoked and the reason s given
Information required to register
Information that prospective Certification Authorities must provide to the Plumbers, Gasfitters and Drainlayers Board have been made in regulations. As has the criteria the Plumbers, Gasfitters and Drainlayers Board will use to assess applications from Certification Authorities. These regulations also set a fee of $375 plus GST that applicants from prospective Certification Authorities must pay the Board to cover their assessment costs.
Information, examples and answers to your questions about the topics covered here can be found on our website, www.mbie.govt.nz
Informed consumers and businesses interacting with confidence
Infrastructure for growth.
Infringement fees and fines
Infringement fees and penalties table
Ingenuity and effective science infrastructure
Initial advice on eligibility to remedies for personal grievances [PDF 263KB]
Initial advice on setting a high-income threshold for personal grievances
Initial advice on setting a high-income threshold for personal grievances [PDF 269KB]
Initial considerations for developing or reviewing a dispute resolution scheme
Initial feedback suggests the new calculations
Initial global drivers for circular approaches were limited raw material availability, climate change and degenerating natural capital. Subsequent drivers have included increasing resilience (including to geopolitical risks and volatile trade), productivity gains, economic competitiveness, and higher value jobs.
Initial paper on income threshold, seeking agreement to targeting consultation.
Initial review is conducted by ACC
Initiative Summary for initiative Funding further decarbonisation of industry and heat and implementing supporting policies (13814) [PDF 506KB]
Initiative Summary for initiative Supporting the energy transition to a low emissions economy (13808) [PDF 390KB]
Initiative summary documents
Inland Revenue (on amendments to parental leave legislation
Inland Revenue Department
Innovation Programme for Tourism Recovery
Innovation, technology and science
Innovations in sustainable agriculture, such as the use of more local and organic alternatives to imported fertiliser.
Innovative Europe: Focuses on innovation and technology development.
Inquiries into the suitability of the loan for the consumer will not be required because they are unlikely to be useful given the nature and structure of BNPL loans.
Insight into the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on safety and health co-operation within an interconnected, multiple-employer, work environment.
Insights - approaches to dispute resolution in New Zealand
Insights from approaches to dispute resolution in New Zealand
Insights into emissions-intensive, trade-exposed businesses
Insights into emissions-intensive, trade-exposed businesses (stage 2)
Insolvency Practitioners (IP) levy No change to the current IP levy of $1.00, with no change to who pays. The Insolvency Practitioners Regulation Act 2019 introduced a ‘co -regulatory licensing regime’ to promote quality, expertise and integrity in the profession of insolvency practitioners (IP).17 The co - regulatory licensing regime means that frontline regulation of insolvency practitioners is carried out by accredited bodies, and that the Registrar of Companies has a role to monitor and report on the adequacy and effectiveness of the systems and p rocesses of regulators. An IP levy was introduced in September 2020 under the Insolvency Practitioners Regulations 2020 as an annual payment for users on the Companies register only, with a commitment to review the charges in the next full review of the Companies Office fees and levies. Who will pay the levy and when The IP levy will continue to be paid annually by companies (New Zealand and overseas) on the Companies register only.18 All companies receive the same benefit of operating in a business environment with an active oversight scheme that ensures compliance with the statutory duties of insolvency practitioners. Costs recovered by the levy Table 7 below shows the type and amount of costs of the IP oversight scheme to be recovered from the existing levy. Table 7: Costs of the IP oversight scheme Cost $m Oversight functions 0.282 Enforcement and education 0.229 Other operating costs 0.02 4 MBIE functional support 0.134 Total cost – levy recovered 0.669 No change proposed to the levy amount The proposed IP levy has been derived by dividing the cost by the annual volume of 70 0,247 (representing the number of companies who incorporate or would file an annual return). Table 8 on the next page shows the unit cost of the IP oversight regime.
Insolvency Review Working Group
Insolvency and Trustee Service
Inspection targets will come into force later in 2025 and legislation to enable the self-certification scheme will be introduced by the end of the year.
Installations with an impact beyond these 2 categories are outside the scope of this regime and will continue to require the written consent of all affected owners eg, if the length of a driveway needs to be dug up it will still need all parties to actively consent.
Institute of Environmental Science and Research Limited
Institute of Geological and Nuclear Science Limited (GNS Science)
Instrument and sensor design and development
Insufficient causal evidence
Insulation requirements in housing and other buildings
Insurance and Financial Services Ombudsman
Insurance contract law review
Integrated circuit design protection
Integrating our funding system with ORCID will be an iterative process that we expect to grow and develop over time.
Intellectual Property Office of NZ
Intellectual property and copyright
Intellectual property enforcement
Intellectual property refers to new or original innovations and creations of the mind such as:
Intellectual property refers to new or original innovations and creations of the mind.
Intellectual property refers to new or original innovations and creations of the mind. This section also covers copyright, trade marks, patents and other forms of intellectual property protection.
Intellectual property regulatory system
Intellectual property rights
Intellectual property rights (also known as IPRs) give creators and innovators the exclusive right, for a limited time, to control what others may do with their creations and innovations.
Intelligence assessment, to establish baseline understanding of the people trafficking landscape in NZ, scheduled for completion. This assessment will be re-produced on an annual basis.
Intelligence assessment, to improve understanding of the people trafficking landscape in New Zealand, scheduled to be undertaken for a second year (delayed from 2022)
Inter-Cultural Capability eLearning
Inter-cultural capability eLearning
Interactive Levelised Cost of Electricity Comparison Tool
Interim Action Plan: July to December 2023
Interim Report from the Holidays Act Taskforce [PDF 2.1MB]
Interim Welcoming Communities Pilot Programme Report
Interim arr angements for spectrum ownership pending creation to the Māori spectrum Entity. The parties to this M OU will agree legal arrangements that allow the IMSC unimpeded use of the Management Rights [as described above] while enabling the Crown to ensure that the Management Rights will be transferred to the Māori Spectrum Entity , and are not transferred to another party or mortgaged in the interim.
Interim hydrogen roadmap: Public consultation submissions summary
Interim report from Holidays Act Taskforce
Internal Policy Advisory Group (IPAG)
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
International Crimes and International Criminal Court Act 2000
International Energy Agency
International Energy Business Forum
International Energy Forum
International Humanitarian Law (IHL)
International Labour Conventions ratified by New Zealand
International Labour Organization
International Labour Policy Team
International Law (LAWPUBL 402)
International Relations and Security Studies
International Science Partnerships
International Science Partnerships programme
International Security and International Relations at Massey
International Visitor Conservation and Tourism Levy
International Visitor Survey
International Visitor Survey (IVS)
International Visitor Survey data release materials
International Visitor Survey methodology
International case studies: regulatory policy solutions to support public electric vehicle (EV) charging infrastructure
International collaborative research projects often provide findings beyond what one team could achieve alone. In what areas do you hope to gain more skills and a better perspective of the topic you are researching?
International developments and implications for Aotearoa New Zealand
International developments toward more circular economies and the implications for New Zealand
International engagement on energy
International experience indicates that adoption of circularity is challenging as it involves significant change in production and consumption systems; governments are using market-shaping interventions to accelerate the shift to reduced and more efficient use of resources.
International financial reforms
International forecast microdata
International obligations and space
International opportunities
International organisations we participate in
International regulatory cooperation
International regulatory cooperation (IRC) toolkit
International regulatory cooperation is the different things a country can do to:
International regulatory cooperation toolkit
International relationships
International research projects
International research shows that successful destinations fulfil each aspect of the visitor journey and experience. They have a strong brand and a diverse offering. This includes a good supply of natural, historic and cultural attractions, varied accommodation types and a range of hospitality offerings. They also have quality infrastructure, services and amenities, which collectively help the destination to be attractive, competitive and sustainable.
International science partnerships
International standards and conformance organisations
International student visa holders
International student visa holders from the Pacific remain small and are mostly dependents of temporary visa holders
International tourism forecasts
International travel arrangements/costs to and from Singapore
International visitor experience report
International visitors bring money into the economy and showcase the New Zealand-Aotearoa brand to an international audience. However, COVID-19 encouraged a renewed focus on the domestic visitor market.
International visitors, domestic visitors and COVID-19
International/Humanitarian visa stream,
Internationally, many policies and regulations are aimed at circular practices and have implications for New Zealand exporters.
InternetNZ is the trustee of the .nz domain name for New Zealand. It is an open membership organisation dedicated to protecting and promoting the Internet for New Zealand.
InternetNZ signed a Memorandum of Understanding with us in May 2016 for the management of the name. Under this MOU, InternetNZ has a duty to manage the domain name in service to the local internet community.
Interpreters can find the test/s MBIE has agreed to fund in their entitlement note issued from MBIE. The next available NAATI test date will likely be after 30 June 2025, but you must have made the booking by then.
Interpreting and applying the law and regulations in good faith.
Into the Black II and III
Into the Black II and III aimed to break the world amateur 2 stage altitude record by reaching an altitude in excess of 120 km.
Into the Black II and III are both 2 stage high-powered sounding rockets, built and designed by the students in the Aerospace Club. Each rocket has a Global Positioning System device in the nose cone to aid post-launch recovery.
Into the Black II was successfully launched on 24 July 2021, although it did not break the amateur 2 stage world record.
Into the Black III was successfully launched on 22 January 2022. Communication with the rocket was lost so the maximum altitude was unable to be confirmed.
Into the Black aimed to break the world amateur 2 stage altitude record and the world altitude record by reaching an altitude of 120km.
Into the Black is a 3.46m, 2 stage high-powered sounding rocket. It was built and designed by students in the Aerospace Club. It has a GPS device in the nose cone to aid post-launch
Introduce 0-250cc, 251-750cc and 751+cc motorcycle risk groups from 1 July 2026 to better reflect the cost of injuries increases as the engine capacity of a motorcycle increases.
Introduce a duty on third parties with significant control or influence over an employer to take reasonable steps to prevent a breach of employment standards occurring.
Introduce legislation to give effect to reforms.
Introduce new approaches to supporting jobseekers, including seminars supporting job profiles/CVs/training and new work check-ins for jobseekers in their first 2 weeks on benefit and after 6 months.
Introducing a Performance Monitoring model to better measure the performance of Accredited Employers (AEs)
Introducing a risk classification system.
Introducing an Income Threshold for Unjustified Dismissal [PDF 147KB]
Introducing an income threshold for unjustified dismissal personal grievances
Introducing sector specific notifiable incidents, requiring operators to report incidents associated with hazards in the sector to WorkSafe.
Introducing specific regulatory requirements for landowners/managers
Introducing specific requirements for how adventure activity operators must assess and manage natural hazard risks
Introduction from Hon Grant Robertson (Minister of Finance), Richard Wagstaff (President) and Kirk Hope (Chief Executive).
Introduction from the Minister for Social Development and Employment
Introduction to this discussion document
Introductory Astronomy (PHYS132)
Invest NZ will work with multi-national corporations and foreign investors to attract people, businesses and capital into New Zealand across industries and technologies, with a particular interest in investing in the science, innovation and technology that will drive our economy.
Invest New Zealand and New Zealand Trade and Enterprise
Investigates complaints about NZ Police
Investigates complaints about government agencies
Investigates complaints about the quality of health and disability services
Investigation into electricity supply interruptions of 9 August 2021
Investigations and reviews for safer buildings
Investing in governance can save time in the longer term as it can help ensure that underperformance is addressed early, rather than having to find resources to respond should something go wrong.
Investment Plan 2025-2027
Investment by the Government in infrastructure and tourism assets:
Investment in people and capability building is critical to lifting the productivity of the tourism sector and delivering quality visitor experiences.
Investment in quality infrastructure and tourism assets helps creates positive economic, social and environmental benefits for New Zealanders, and our visitors.
Investor Guide to the NZ Tech Sector
Invoices can be sent to us as a PDF attachment to
Involving the wider team in discussions about flexible working arrangements, what could work and the potential impacts on the team and MBIE.
Is anything missing from the adventure activities regulatory regime that increases the chance of catastrophic events occurring when adventure activities operate on/near natural hazards? Are more specific roles or specific controls for the management of natural hazard risks needed?
Issue 10 – Availability of sick leave, family violence leave and bereavement leave 146. All employees under the Act are entitled to five days’ paid sick leave a year, 10 days’ family violence leave a year and bereavement leave of either three days or one day pe r bereavement depending on the nature of the relationship with the deceased. These forms of leave are made available to employees after six months ’ continuous employment. Although an employer and employee can agree to take sick leave, family violence leave or bereavement leave in advance, there is no obligation on the employer to provide them before six months’ employment. 147. The Taskforce recognises that employees have little control over when they may need sick leave, family violence leave and bereavement le ave, and would benefit from having protections in place in the first six months. The current waiting period may also encourage some employees to go to work sick, which raises health and safety concerns and is not in line with the intention of the Act to pr omote balance between work and other aspects of employees’ lives. Recommendation 10 The Taskforce recommends that: 10.1 Eligible employees should be entitled to bereavement leave and family violence leave from the first day of employment. 10.2 Eligible employees sho uld be entitled to one day of sick leave from their first day of employment, with an additional day per month of employment until the full entitlement of five da ys is reached after four months (the entitlement of five days for the second and subsequent yea rs of employment should apply from the anniversary of their employment) .
Issue 11 – Partial sick and family violence leave 148. The Act considers sick leave and family violence leave in days and does not explicitly allow for these types of leave to be taken i n units of less than a day. For example, if an employee works for part of the day and then goes home sick, this may be counted as using a whole day of sick leave. This is potentially unfair for employees and can reduce their sick and family violence leave entitlements at a faster rate than actually used. 149. In practice, many employers allow their employees to take sick leave in part days. However, the Taskforce sees a clear benefit in this applying to all employees as it would protect employees’ entitlements t o these types of leave and provide clarity to employers and employees. 150. The Taskforce also considered whether employees should have the ability to take bereavement leave, alternative holidays and public holidays in units of less than a day. However, it conc luded that allowing for partial bereavement leave could create a situation where employees feel compelled to shorten their bereavement leave, while allowing for partial alternative holidays and public holidays would not align with the purpose of these prov isions. Recommendation 11 The Taskforce recommends that employees should have the ability to take sick leave and family violence leave in units of less than a day on a proportionate basis for time and pay with
Issue 11 – Partial sick and family violence leave 148. The Act considers sick leave and family violence leave in days and does not explicitly allow for these types of leave to be taken i n units of less than a day. For example, if an employee works for part of the day and then goes home sick, this may be counted as using a whole day of sick leave. This is potentially unfair for employees and can reduce their sick and family violence leave entitlements at a faster rate than actually used. 149. In practice, many employers allow their employees to take sick leave in part days. However, the Taskforce sees a clear benefit in this applying to all employees as it would protect employees’ entitlements t o these types of leave and provide clarity to employers and employees. 150. The Taskforce also considered whether employees should have the ability to take bereavement leave, alternative holidays and public holidays in units of less than a day. However, it conc luded that allowing for partial bereavement leave could create a situation where employees feel compelled to shorten their bereavement leave, while allowing for partial alternative holidays and public holidays would not align with the purpose of these prov isions. Recommendation 11 The Taskforce recommends that employees should have the ability to take sick leave and family violence leave in units of less than a day on a proportionate basis for time and pay with 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
Issue 12 – Eligibility for sick leave, family violence leave and bereavement leave 151. Under the current Act, employees are eligible for sick leave, family violence leave and bereavement leave if:  they have six months’ current continuous employment with the same employer , or  they have worked for the employer for six months for: o an average of 10 hours per week, and o at least one hour in every week or 40 hours in every month. 152. As outlined above , the Taskforce recommends that these forms of leave are available to eligible employees from their first day of employment. If this recommendation was implemented, the current eligibility criteria would no longer be appropriate and would need to be amended to better align with this approach. Recommendation 12 The Taskforce reco mmends that a new test be established for eligibility for family violence, sick and bereavement leave, as follows: 12.1 All employees with agreed hours and an expectation of continuous employment should be eligible for family violence leave and bereavement leav e from the first day of employment. 12.2 All employees with agreed hours and an expectation of continuous employment should be eligible for sick leave from the first day of employment. Sick leave days should build up from one day on the first day of employment to a full entitlement of 5 days after 4 months. 12.3 ‘Agreed hours’ refers to the hours that the employer and employee have agreed that the employee will work, as outlined in the employment agreement. ‘Expectations of continuous employment’ refers to the expect ation that the employee will not have any periods of unpaid leave that are longer than one week. 12.4 Employees with no agreed hours or who are not expected to work continuously should be subject to an ‘hours test’ applied after 13 weeks. This test requires tha t the employee works on average at least 10 hours a week over the preceding 13 weeks. If the employee meets this threshold, they become eligible for sick leave, family violence leave and bereavement leave. If they do not meet this test, it is repeated afte r 13 weeks to see if they meet the hours requirement or have been working continuously. 12.5 All employees should be eligible for sick leave, family violence leave and bereavement leave after six months of continuous employment .
Issue 13 – Prescriptive O therw ise Working Day test 153. Although section 12(3) provides a list of factors to be taken into account by the employer and employee when determining whether a day is an Otherwise Working Day, these factors are not ranked and there is no guidance about the weighti ng that should be attached to each factor. This can cause problems when determining whether an employee is eligible or not for a day of FBAPS leave. 154. To address this the Taskforce is proposing a prescriptive test that can be used to definitively answer the question of whether a particular calend ar day is an Otherwise Working D ay for an employee.
Issue 13 – Prescriptive O therw ise Working Day test 153. Although section 12(3) provides a list of factors to be taken into account by the employer and employee when determining whether a day is an Otherwise Working Day, these factors are not ranked and there is no guidance about the weighti ng that should be attached to each factor. This can cause problems when determining whether an employee is eligible or not for a day of FBAPS leave. 154. To address this the Taskforce is proposing a prescriptive test that can be used to definitively answer the question of whether a particular calend ar day is an Otherwise Working D ay for an employee. 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
Issue 14 – Extension of bereavement leave 159. The Act provides three days’ bereavement leave on the death of immediate family member. A separate provision enables an employee to take one day’s bereavement leave on the death of any other person at the discretion of the employer. 160. Berea vement leave is intended to help employees emotionally recover from their loss before returning to work, and to allow them to take care of matters to do with the bereavement. The Taskforce believes that eligibility for three days’ bereavement leave should be extended, to recognise that employees could be equally bereaved by the loss of extended family, and to support cultural practises and varied family arrangements.
Issue 15 – Transferring public holidays 161. An employer and employee can currently agree to transfer a public holiday that is an Otherwise Working Day fo r the employee to be observed on a different Otherwise Working Day. This provision is intende d to recognise cultural diversity in workplaces, but it can disadvantage employees . 162. An employee who works a public holiday is paid time and a half and also given an alternative paid day off. The ‘transfer’ of a public holiday is equivalent to this alternative paid day off, but the employee is no longer paid time and a half for working on the public holiday. The ‘transfer’ can also be complicated for employees with variable rosters, who may not know in advance whether the day they would like to transfer thei r public holiday to will be an O therwise Working Day for them. Recommendation 15 The Taskforce recommends two changes to this section of the Act: 15.1 The Act currentl y states that “the purpose of the transfer is not to avoid the employee’s entitlements under sections 50 and 56 for working on a public holiday, although the transfer may have that effect.” The employee’s entitlements under sections 50 and 56 are to be pai d time and a half for working on the public holiday, and to be provided with an alternative holiday if they work on a public holiday. The Taskforce recommends that the phrase “although the transfer may have that effect” is removed from the Act. 15.2 The Taskfor ce recommends that a day that a public holiday is transferred to should automatically be treated as an O therwise Working Day for an employee, regardless of their working pattern. This enables employees to transfer paid public holidays to days that are of s ignificance to them, without being limited by their work pattern or lack of clarity about future rostering.
Issue 15 – Transferring public holidays 161. An employer and employee can currently agree to transfer a public holiday that is an Otherwise Working Day fo r the employee to be observed on a different Otherwise Working Day. This provision is intende d to recognise cultural diversity in workplaces, but it can disadvantage employees . 162. An employee who works a public holiday is paid time and a half and also given an alternative paid day off. The ‘transfer’ of a public holiday is equivalent to this alternative paid day off, but the employee is no longer paid time and a half for working on the public holiday. The ‘transfer’ can also be complicated for employees with variable rosters, who may not know in advance whether the day they would like to transfer thei r public holiday to will be an O therwise Working Day for them. Recommendation 15 The Taskforce recommends two changes to this section of the Act: 15.1 The Act currentl y states that “the purpose of the transfer is not to avoid the employee’s entitlements under sections 50 and 56 for working on a public holiday, although the transfer may have that effect.” The employee’s entitlements under sections 50 and 56 are to be pai d time and a half for working on the public holiday, and to be provided with an alternative holiday if they work on a public holiday. The Taskforce recommends that the phrase “although the transfer may have that effect” is removed from the Act. 15.2 The Taskfor ce recommends that a day that a public holiday is transferred to should automatically be treated as an O therwise Working Day for an employee, regardless of their working pattern. This enables employees to transfer paid public holidays to days that are of s ignificance to them, without being limited by their work pattern or lack of clarity about future rostering. 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
Issue 17 – Closedowns 164. The Act allows employers to have one period per year where they ‘customarily’ close operations and require employees to use some or all of their annual holiday entitlements. Businesses can have additional closedowns throughout the year if employees agree, but employers cannot require the use of holiday entitlements for these additional closedowns. 165. A number of issues were id entified with the ‘closedowns’ section of the Act. Many aspects of the provision lacked clarity; the minimum notice period appeared to be disproportionate to the impact closedowns can have on employees; and there were particularly negative consequences for employees not entitled to holidays at the time of a closedown. The current Act prescribes a mandatory 8 per cent pay-out for employees not entitled to holidays at the time of a closedown, which leads to a ‘reset’ of those employees’ anniversary dates, so they are ineligible for paid holidays for another 12 months. Recommendation 17 The Taskforce recommends that closedown provisions should be amended to provide greater transparency and certainty for employees. In addition, the requirements that holidays are paid out at 8% and an employee’s anniversary date is reset should be removed . The Taskforce recommends six changes to the closedowns sections of the Act: 17.1 Employees should have an obligation to inform incoming employees, in writing, if their business has a ‘customary’ closedown, with an indication of the general time of year and length of this closedown. This should happen before the prospective employee signs the employment agreement. 17.2 The Act should note that a new business can establish the ‘custom’ of a closedown, but they must provide a reasonable notice period to all existing employees. 17.3 The requirement that employees who are not entitled to holidays at the time of a closedown be paid out 8% of their gross earnings and have their anniversary date reset should be removed (although it should still be possible for anniversary dates to
Issue 17 – Closedowns 164. The Act allows employers to have one period per year where they ‘customarily’ close operations and require employees to use some or all of their annual holiday entitlements. Businesses can have additional closedowns throughout the year if employees agree, but employers cannot require the use of holiday entitlements for these additional closedowns. 165. A number of issues were id entified with the ‘closedowns’ section of the Act. Many aspects of the provision lacked clarity; the minimum notice period appeared to be disproportionate to the impact closedowns can have on employees; and there were particularly negative consequences for employees not entitled to holidays at the time of a closedown. The current Act prescribes a mandatory 8 per cent pay-out for employees not entitled to holidays at the time of a closedown, which leads to a ‘reset’ of those employees’ anniversary dates, so they are ineligible for paid holidays for another 12 months. Recommendation 17 The Taskforce recommends that closedown provisions should be amended to provide greater transparency and certainty for employees. In addition, the requirements that holidays are paid out at 8% and an employee’s anniversary date is reset should be removed . The Taskforce recommends six changes to the closedowns sections of the Act: 17.1 Employees should have an obligation to inform incoming employees, in writing, if their business has a ‘customary’ closedown, with an indication of the general time of year and length of this closedown. This should happen before the prospective employee signs the employment agreement. 17.2 The Act should note that a new business can establish the ‘custom’ of a closedown, but they must provide a reasonable notice period to all existing employees. 17.3 The requirement that employees who are not entitled to holidays at the time of a closedown be paid out 8% of their gross earnings and have their anniversary date reset should be removed (although it should still be possible for anniversary dates to 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
Issue 18 – Sale and transfer of a business 166. Under the current Act, employees’ outstanding leave entitlements cannot be transferred from an outgoing employer to a new employer in the event that a business is sold. This is because, in these situations, existing employment agreements come to an end and the Act requires that outstanding entitlements to leave are to be paid out at the end of employment. The exception to this requirement is when vulnerable workers are involved and section 69J of Part 6A of the Employment Relations Act 2000 applies . 167. The Taskforce is aware that it is not always well understood by employers what is permitted with regards to leave entitlements when the sale and transfer of a business occurs. In addition, employees can be disadvantaged by having their leave entitlements paid out as th ey need to then wait 6 or 12 months until they are once again entitled to annual holidays , sick leave, family violence leave and bereavement leave. Recommendation 18 The Taskforce recommends that on the sale and transfer of a business, employees should ha ve a choice about whether to transfer all of their leave entitlements or have them paid out and reset. Issue 19 – Record -keeping requirements 168. Under the current Act, employers must keep the information necessary to demonstrate that they have complied with minimum entitlement provisions. This helps ensure that employers hold the information needed to calculate pay and leave entitlements, address any queries from employees and support any investigation into incorrect payment or miscalculation. 169. The Taskforce agrees with this general approach and recognises that the record -keeping provisions will need to be updated if changes are made to how leave entitlements and payments are calculated. 170. The Taskforce also noted that employees should have access to information about their holiday and leave records on request and that the employer would be expected to provide this information in a format that can be understood by the employee. Recommendation 19 The Taskforce recommends that: 19.1 Record -keeping requi rements should be updated to reflect changes to how leave entitlements are held, calculated and paid, as outlined in Annex 3. 19.2 Employers should be required to retain all holiday and leave records for six years and to make these available to employees on request in a format that can be understood and supports verification by the employee . However, employers should retain relevant
Issue 18 – Sale and transfer of a business 166. Under the current Act, employees’ outstanding leave entitlements cannot be transferred from an outgoing employer to a new employer in the event that a business is sold. This is because, in these situations, existing employment agreements come to an end and the Act requires that outstanding entitlements to leave are to be paid out at the end of employment. The exception to this requirement is when vulnerable workers are involved and section 69J of Part 6A of the Employment Relations Act 2000 applies . 167. The Taskforce is aware that it is not always well understood by employers what is permitted with regards to leave entitlements when the sale and transfer of a business occurs. In addition, employees can be disadvantaged by having their leave entitlements paid out as th ey need to then wait 6 or 12 months until they are once again entitled to annual holidays , sick leave, family violence leave and bereavement leave. Recommendation 18 The Taskforce recommends that on the sale and transfer of a business, employees should ha ve a choice about whether to transfer all of their leave entitlements or have them paid out and reset. Issue 19 – Record -keeping requirements 168. Under the current Act, employers must keep the information necessary to demonstrate that they have complied with minimum entitlement provisions. This helps ensure that employers hold the information needed to calculate pay and leave entitlements, address any queries from employees and support any investigation into incorrect payment or miscalculation. 169. The Taskforce agrees with this general approach and recognises that the record -keeping provisions will need to be updated if changes are made to how leave entitlements and payments are calculated. 170. The Taskforce also noted that employees should have access to information about their holiday and leave records on request and that the employer would be expected to provide this information in a format that can be understood by the employee. Recommendation 19 The Taskforce recommends that: 19.1 Record -keeping requi rements should be updated to reflect changes to how leave entitlements are held, calculated and paid, as outlined in Annex 3. 19.2 Employers should be required to retain all holiday and leave records for six years and to make these available to employees on request in a format that can be understood and supports verification by the employee . However, employers should retain relevant 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
Issue 21 – Compliance and enforcement 173. The Taskforce noted that the issues that cause n on-compliance with the current Act should be considered in the design of the compliance and enforcement mechanisms to support any revised Act. This work should also consider the ability of different parties to raise concerns in relation to the Act , the appropriate enforcement mechanisms available to the different stakeholders (for example, which options are available to which parties) and the appropriate avenues fo r these concerns to be pursued . 174. The Taskforce noted that the development of the appropriate compliance and enforcement mechanisms for an y revised system would require further design and policy work. Recommendation 21 The Taskforce noted that the issues that cause non -compliance with the current Act should be considered in the design of the compliance and enforcement mechanisms to support any revised Act . Issue 2 2 – Ability to a gree above minimum standards 175. The Taskforce was keen to ensure that employers and employees have the ability to agree to leave arrangements that vary from the entitlements set out in the Act providing it can be demon strated that these arrangements provide the employee with leave entitlements that, at a minimum, meet the standards set out in the Act. 176. In its deliberations the Taskforce chose to focus on developing recommendations for the economy as a whole. While it did conside r the impact that particular options could have on particular employee types and working arrangements, it chose not to directly enter into discussions with any specific sectors throughout the review to avoid being seen to have favoured any speci fic sector in the development of its recommendations. 177. The Taskforce does, however , acknowledge th at its proposals will have implications for specific sectors (such as the education sector) which will need to be worked through .
Issue 3 – Taking annual holidays in advance 119. Employees are currently entitled to four weeks’ paid annual holidays after 12 months of continuous employment . Although employees can request annual holidays in advance, employers have no obligation to approve this request. This means an employee may not be able to take any time off work during their first 12 months of employment. 120. The Taskforce acknowledges that many good employers already allow their employees to take leave in advance. However, it woul d like to see all employees have the ability to take annual holidays within the first 12 months of employment if the need arises. Recommendation 3 The Taskforce recommends that employees should have the ability to take annual holidays in their first 12 mon ths up to the amount they would be eligible for on a pro -rata basis (i.e. no right to take more leave than entitled to). For example, an employee who had worked in a role for three months could not be unreasonably prevented from taking a week of annual hol idays. Any leave that was requested above the pro -rata entitlement would be at the discretion of the employer. In addition, the Taskforce also recommends that: 3.1 Annual holidays in advance on a pro -rata basis should be subject to the same considerations as a ny annual holidays request. For instance, the provisions that apply to the taking of annual holidays entitlements should be replicated to maintain the balance of interest between the employee and employer (i.e. an agreement between parties as to when annua l holidays in advance will be taken, and the obligation on employers to not unreasonably withhold consent). 3.2 Annual holidays in advance needs to reflect the pattern of work at the time it is taken. For example, if an employee increases their hours later in the year, they cannot go back and receive a top -up on the holidays they have previously taken . 3.3 It should be made explicit that employers are expressly prohibited from requiring employees to take annual holidays in advance . 3.4 Alternative holidays cannot be un reasonably withheld (in line with annual holidays in
Issue 3 – Taking annual holidays in advance 119. Employees are currently entitled to four weeks’ paid annual holidays after 12 months of continuous employment . Although employees can request annual holidays in advance, employers have no obligation to approve this request. This means an employee may not be able to take any time off work during their first 12 months of employment. 120. The Taskforce acknowledges that many good employers already allow their employees to take leave in advance. However, it woul d like to see all employees have the ability to take annual holidays within the first 12 months of employment if the need arises. Recommendation 3 The Taskforce recommends that employees should have the ability to take annual holidays in their first 12 mon ths up to the amount they would be eligible for on a pro -rata basis (i.e. no right to take more leave than entitled to). For example, an employee who had worked in a role for three months could not be unreasonably prevented from taking a week of annual hol idays. Any leave that was requested above the pro -rata entitlement would be at the discretion of the employer. In addition, the Taskforce also recommends that: 3.1 Annual holidays in advance on a pro -rata basis should be subject to the same considerations as a ny annual holidays request. For instance, the provisions that apply to the taking of annual holidays entitlements should be replicated to maintain the balance of interest between the employee and employer (i.e. an agreement between parties as to when annua l holidays in advance will be taken, and the obligation on employers to not unreasonably withhold consent). 3.2 Annual holidays in advance needs to reflect the pattern of work at the time it is taken. For example, if an employee increases their hours later in the year, they cannot go back and receive a top -up on the holidays they have previously taken . 3.3 It should be made explicit that employers are expressly prohibited from requiring employees to take annual holidays in advance . 3.4 Alternative holidays cannot be un reasonably withheld (in line with annual holidays in 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
Issue 6 – Clarifying the eligibility of Pay -As-You-Go (PAYG) provisions 130. The Act allows for an employer to regularly pay annual holiday pay with the employee’s pay, also known as PA YG, if the employee works for the employer on a basis that is so intermittent or irregular that it is impracticable for the employer to provide the employee with four weeks’ annual holidays. In addition, the Act states that PAYG must be specified in an emp loyment agreement at a rate of not less than eight per cent and that the holiday pay is identifiable as a separate component of the employee’s pay. 131. The Taskforce wishes to improve the definition of ‘intermittent or irregular’ in relation to PAYG to provide clarity for employers and employees, reduce inappropriate use of PAYG, and increase the general threshold of eligibility for PAYG. The rationale behind these changes is to promote the actual taking of holidays, whenever possible, in line with the purpose of the Act. Recommendation 6 6.1 The Taskforce recommends that the ability for employers to use pay -as-you-go (PAYG) for employees on fixed -term contracts of less than 12 months should be removed and a more detailed definition should be provided for when PAYG can be used because a work pattern is ‘intermittent or irregular’. 6.2 The proposed four -part test of an ‘intermittent or irregular’ working pattern is:  the employee has no minimum number of hours and no ex pectation of ongoing employment, and  the empl oyer has no obligation to provide work or the employee to accept work , and
Issue 6 – Clarifying the eligibility of Pay -As-You-Go (PAYG) provisions 130. The Act allows for an employer to regularly pay annual holiday pay with the employee’s pay, also known as PA YG, if the employee works for the employer on a basis that is so intermittent or irregular that it is impracticable for the employer to provide the employee with four weeks’ annual holidays. In addition, the Act states that PAYG must be specified in an emp loyment agreement at a rate of not less than eight per cent and that the holiday pay is identifiable as a separate component of the employee’s pay. 131. The Taskforce wishes to improve the definition of ‘intermittent or irregular’ in relation to PAYG to provide clarity for employers and employees, reduce inappropriate use of PAYG, and increase the general threshold of eligibility for PAYG. The rationale behind these changes is to promote the actual taking of holidays, whenever possible, in line with the purpose of the Act. Recommendation 6 6.1 The Taskforce recommends that the ability for employers to use pay -as-you-go (PAYG) for employees on fixed -term contracts of less than 12 months should be removed and a more detailed definition should be provided for when PAYG can be used because a work pattern is ‘intermittent or irregular’. 6.2 The proposed four -part test of an ‘intermittent or irregular’ working pattern is:  the employee has no minimum number of hours and no ex pectation of ongoing employment, and  the empl oyer has no obligation to provide work or the employee to accept work , and 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
Issue 7 – Interaction between availability provisions and Holidays Act entitlements 132. Availability provisions (under section 67D of the Employment Relations Act 2000 ) are clauses in employment contracts that require the employee to be available to accept any work the employer offers within specified periods . Employees are paid compensation for making themselves available. 133. The Employment Relations Act and Holidays Act are both silent on the relationship between availability clauses and Holidays Act entitlements. This gap means there is
Issue 7 – Interaction between availability provisions and Holidays Act entitlements 132. Availability provisions (under section 67D of the Employment Relations Act 2000 ) are clauses in employment contracts that require the employee to be available to accept any work the employer offers within specified periods . Employees are paid compensation for making themselves available. 133. The Employment Relations Act and Holidays Act are both silent on the relationship between availability clauses and Holidays Act entitlements. This gap means there is 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
Issued licences and permits
It allows workers to make a pay equity claim using a process
It also applies to every contract or funding arrangement entered into by MBIE with other persons or organisations for the provision of services for children.
It also lays out a work programme to achieve that vision.
It brings together a range of economic datasets we produce jointly with Statistics New Zealand into one easy-to-use tool. Information is presented using dynamic graphs and summary tables.
It focuses on a number of topics including contribution to GDP, employment, labour market and skills, as well as performance in productivity, innovation and exports.
It focuses on people aged 50 and over and is made up of 11 action items with a focus on training and upskilling, finding and staying in work, supporting employers to be more inclusive, and planning for the effects and opportunities of an aging workforce.
It fosters human capacity building, social integration, and strong and flexible labour markets by developing useful labour market information and policy, improved workplace conditions and practices, and strong social safety nets. New Zealand held the role of coordinator for this network over the period of 2021-22.
It has 3 goals to support this vision and 12 key actions for Ministers to drive progress. The actions are led via the Social Development and Employment, Education, Immigration, Tertiary Education and Skills, and Regional Development portfolios, and agency leads from the Ministry of Social Development (MSD), Ministry of Education (MoE), Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE), and the Tertiary Education Commission (TEC).
It highlighted some of the most popular experiences sought out by Australian visitors, such as fine dining, jet boating, cycling through vineyards and even star gazing in a hot tub in internationally- renowned dark sky reserves.
It includes the following workstreams:
It is a requirement under the ILO Convention 42, to which Aotearoa New Zealand is a party, for members to provide compensation to workers incapacitated by occupational diseases.
It is an offence punishable by a fine of up to $10,000 for anyone other than a Universal Postal Union-designated operator to issue stamps with the words 'New Zealand' in any other form.
It is an offence to aid or abet migrants to remain in New Zealand or to breach the conditions of their visas.
It is an offence to post dangerous or objectionable material. The law allows postal operators to hold suspicious or dangerous postal articles.
It is an offence to unlawfully open a postal article that is not addressed to you, or to divulge its contents.
It is an update to an earlier convention, which New Zealand is party to.
It is highly recommended that interpreters book their second test as soon as possible to allow NAATI time to confirm the test booking by the closing date.
It is not acceptable for participating government agencies to seek to form a commercial relationship with an individual interpreter outside of their relationship with their chosen provider. Interpreters may choose to change from one provider to another, or work concurrently for more than one provider; that is a matter for the interpreter and the providers, and government agencies should not be involved in this.
It is not cost-effective to provide UFB in every rural community. Instead, the Rural Broadband Initiative (RBI) is providing faster internet to hundreds of thousands of rural homes and businesses outside UFB areas.
It is not intended to give all the answers or provide a template for the design and structure of a new scheme. Disputes are unique to their context and require bespoke solutions for effective resolution.
It is reasonable and prudent for ACC to charge debit interest when businesses pay their levies by instalments because ACC is forgoing any interest it would have earnt from investing the levies earlier. This is fairer for those businesses paying their levies in a single payment on the due date.
It is your responsibility to ensure any worker engaged in your operation is able to undertake the work, and is not doing so unlawfully or breaching their visa conditions.
It may also be of interest to practitioners and members of the public.
It passed its third reading late July 2020, and will come into force on 6 November.
It provides advice on the policy and operational issues related specifically to dispute resolution.
It provides the following rebates on specified goods and services purchased in New Zealand:
It was important that the Government considered recommendations in this report before the group started work on a second phase. Further advice is due to MBIE in due course and will largely focus on funding mechanisms.
It was set up as a partnership between government, industry organisations and research institutions.
It will help address the current disparity where a person who experiences an accident can receive much more support than a person with a non-accident-related health condition or disability, such as being diagnosed with cancer, despite a similar loss of ability to work.
It will take approximately 15 minutes for you to complete on behalf of your organisation or as an individual.
It's been a long time coming since the last one was in 2019. And so much has happened since then.
It's calculated as the difference between the:
Its goal is for New Zealand to have an energy-productive and low-emissions economy.
James Hartley, Consumer and Commercial System
James told me that you all know what circular economy is. So, we don't really need to go into that in detail. But just to recap quickly, there are three principles of circular economy. Trying to eliminate waste and pollution through better design. We really want to circulate products and materials in the economy at the highest value for as long as possible. So, we're looking at whether it's the material, like as simple as a piece of wood, can we reuse that wood? Can we retain that wood for longer and look after it? If it's a product like a computer, how can we keep that going for as long as possible? And then at the end of the life, how can we take the materials that are left behind and put them back into the next production line? And by doing so we protect nature because we're not continually extracting material from nature. We're using the material that we have in our economy already as much as possible. So, we help to regenerate nature. And of course, if there's anything that's biological in that process, whether it be food or anything else, we return that to nature to help grow the next crop, whether that's a forest and apples or vegetables, etc. So that's the circular principles, just a recap and a reminder.
Jan Marsh A small number of submissions were received as part of the Review regarding the potential for weaponisation of space and the need for space to be used exclusively for peaceful purposes. These submissions included the following suggested amendments to the Act: • Add a new purpose of promoting the peaceful uses of outer space and ensure that no weapons or potential weapons are launched from New Zealand or by New Zealanders. • Include new threshold requirements in the payload permitting provision in the Act designed to ensure that the payload is not a test for, or potential part of, a weapon or of a device that can ass ist the operation of a weapon. • References to international obligations and national interest in the Act should be supplemented with the words “including disarmament and arms control treaties and agreements to which New Zealand is a party”. • Require complian ce with the New Zealand Nuclear Free Zone, Disarmament, and Arms Control Act 1987. • Require consultation with the Minister of Disarmament and Arms Control on licence and permit applications under the Act as it does with the Security Ministers. • The Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade should be added into section 85(2) of the Act which provides for information sharing between the Minister and the various agencies that perform regulatory function affecting space activities. This matter will be considered as part of the space policy review which ministers have recently agreed to.
Jason Dawson, CE, Hamilton & Waikato Tourism
Job Check Models [PDF 3.1MB]
Job growth for different industries
Jobs Online monitors changes in an index of online job advertisements, not the number of actual online job advertisements. It uses information from online job advertisements from 4 internet job boards: SEEK, Trade Me Jobs, the Education Gazette and Kiwi Health Jobs.
Jobs Online monthly data release
Jobs Online quarterly release
John Caradus, CE, Grasslanz Technology Limited
John Crocker (January to October 2019)
Join one of our social media channels and take part in the conversation. We have a presence on:
Join our mailing list to receive information and news on government funding initiatives and other support for tourism.
Join our mailing list to receive our latest Energy data.
Join our mailing list to receive our latest tourism data.
Join our mailing list to receive the latest Tourism information and news on government funding initiatives and other support for tourism.
Join our mailing list to receive the latest tourism data released by MBIE, for example the Tourism Electronic Card Transactions.
Joint BusinessNZ and CTU memo on support for displaced workers [PDF 189KB]
Joint BusinessNZ and CTU memo on support for displaced workers and skills and training [PDF 208KB]
Joint Immigration NZ (INZ)-Employment NZ (ENZ) Compliance and Enforcement Strategy completed.
Joint Immigration NZ (INZ)-Employment NZ (ENZ) Compliance and Enforcement Strategy, designed to improve collaboration to combat migrant exploitation, completed and being applied.
Joint Oil Organisations Data Initiative
Joint Presentation on Social Unemployment Insurance [PDF 933KB]
Joint Social Partner Memo on Partnership for a Just Transition [PDF 3.5MB]
Joint Statement of Principle: Adoption and use of ORCID identifiers in New Zealand
Joint Working Group on Pay Equity Principles
Joint memo from BusinessNZ and the NZCTU on the Just Transition gap analysis and Future of Work Tripartite Forum priorities [PDF 216KB]
Joint winner: Cairo Akehurst
Joint winner: Tianyi Mathur
Jointly with the Treasury, we concluded a review into open access weather data in October 2018.
Joseph's employment agreement guarantee s him a minimum 10 hours a week, but he is regularly offered additional work when it is available. The work c an take place on any days of the week. He is paid $20 an hour. The data below provides 12 weeks of his work pattern. Week Days and hours worked No of days worked Total hours Gross pay Variation Mon Tue Wed Thu Fri Sat Sun 1 4 8 10 4 6 6 0 6 38 760 280 2 0 0 6 4 10 0 0 3 20 400 100 3 6 6 0 0 8 10 10 5 40 800 300 4 0 0 0 0 0 8 8 2 16 320 60 5 0 0 0 10 0 0 0 1 10 200 0 6 4 4 0 10 0 8 8 5 34 680 240 7 8 8 8 8 8 10 0 6 50 1000 400 8 8 0 0 10 8 0 0 3 26 520 160 9 0 0 0 10 0 0 0 1 10 200 0 10 8 8 0 0 8 4 0 4 28 560 180 11 4 4 4 0 0 0 0 3 12 240 20 12 8 8 0 10 8 10 0 5 44 880 340
Judicial Decisions Online
Just a bit of context around this workshop. This is part of a wider piece of work and research that a consortium of organisations including SBN, Aurecon, ThinkStep as well as The Connective, Arup and Project Moonshot are working on to provide insights to the Ministry of Business Innovation and Employment to feed into a national circular economy and bioeconomy strategy as part of the emissions reduction plan. And so it is quite important work, and a big opportunity for everyone to input into that work. There are lots of streams happening and we are really keen to get your input.
Just as in other professions and sectors, ongoing professional development, such as attending conferences, webinars, and trainings will need to be completed to ensure that the credential is maintained.
Just over a third of approvals were under the
Just over half of those approved (53%) were partners of New Zealanders (with a likelihood of transitioning into residence).
Just transitions - Gap analysis [PDF 448KB]
Just transitions are a powerful invitation for communities to develop positive visions for change, transform unfair systems, draw on diverse strengths and worldviews, and come together to solve problems in ways that work better for everyone.
Justin Watson, Christchurch International Airport
Justin has a broad experience base, including significant international marketing and partnership experience, having worked intimately with all of New Zealand's key international trading partners, along with industry experience across FMCG, retail, tourism and government.
Justin is on the New Zealand China Council and was previously a Tourism Industry Aotearoa board member.
Justin is the Chief Aeronautical and Commercial Officer at Christchurch International Airport, responsible for leading the airports aeronautical development, customer, HR and commercial teams.
K-200 is a single-stage sounding rocket. Its primary objective is to test propulsion systems developed by Argo Navis, as well as to prove critical flight infrastructure and systems for future high-altitude launches.
Ka whakapau kaha kia whakawhanake tonu.
Kaitautoko - partners and supporters
Kaupapahere Rangahau Tuwhera - Open Research policy
Kaylene Larkin / Ashlin Chand, Meat Industry Association of New Zealand Incorporated
Kea Aerospace Limited (Kea) is a New Zealand aerospace company, focused on stratospheric flight operation and aerial imaging.
Keep reading to find out how your space career could take off.
Keep up to date on changes by subscribing to the
Keep up to date with news and events from across the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE).
Keep up to date with news, and access resources related to Managed Isolation and Quarantine.
Keep up your Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) subjects
Keeping in Touch days allow parents to do limited work while on parental leave, if they choose to, for example to attend a team day or an organisational announcement.
Keeping in Touch extended
Key accountabilities and responsibilities
Key briefings provided by MBIE to the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety
Key documents for changes to employment legislation
Key employer obligations Employers are required to fully comply with the provisions set out in the Act. Some of the key obligations include:  Providing eligible employees with at least four weeks of annual leave a year, a paid day off when a public holiday falls on a day that an employee would usually work, at least five days’ sick leave each year, and three da ys’ paid bereavement leave if an immediate family members dies (or one day ’s paid leave for the death of a person outside their immediate family )  Using the calculation method for annual holidays (either OWP or AWE) that results in the greater rate  Using the employee’s RDP for calculating payment for public holidays, sick leave and bereavement leave, unless it is not possible or practical or the employee’s daily pay varies within the relevant pay period , in which case ADP may be used  Keeping accurate and u p to date holiday and leave records
Key findings: Overall, the report concludes that the regulatory regime has a good track record to date and is well regarded by those entities that engage with it. There have been no material safety or security incidents and the licencing and permitting processes under the Act have operated efficiently.
Key protections from the CCCFA are outlined below:
Key: ++ much better than doing nothing/the status quo + better than doing nothing/the status quo 0 about the same as doing nothing/the status quo - worse than doing nothing/the status quo - - much worse than doing nothing/the status quo 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:06:16
Kiwi Innovation Network Limited
Kiwi researchers looking at how we weather solar storms
Kiwi scientists revolutionising x-ray scanning technology
Kiwi wine tech shakes up industry
KiwiSaver Act 2006 (Part 4 and Schedule 1)
Know your consumer rights
Knowledge Intensive Services report
Knowledge intensive services report 2014
Korea-New Zealand Free Trade Agreement (2015)
Kumeu Film Studios outdoor water tank.
LEADR/Victoria University Commercial Mediation in New Zealand Project Report (June 2015) [PDF 520KB]
LEGISLATIVE ISSUE SUBMITTER ANALYSIS RECOMMENDATIONS Should payload permits and overseas payload permits be wrapped into a single permit that applies to payloads launched from New Zealand and payloads launched overseas. Space, Policy and Regulatory Team (MBIE) An issue that has arisen in relation to constellations where a New Zea land operator intends to launch some satellites that are part of a constellation in New Zealand and some overseas, where the timing of the launch is uncertain. While the assessment of satellites launched from New Zealand is necessarily different from satel lites launched overseas, it may be administratively easier if no distinction was made between a payload permit and an overseas payload permit. We note however, that the same or similar benefits do not hold in the context of combining domestic and overseas launch licences, due to the fact that these often have location -specific safety requirements and do not have a set number of launches attached to the licence. A change to the payload permitting provisions would mean significant reformatting of the payload permit sections of the Act, but arguably this disadvantage would be outweighed by the benefits, such as greater efficiency, that are likely to be gained from a more streamlined approach. Contrarily, there are also advantages in treating the launch licen sing and payload permitting sections in the same way since they arise from the same treaty obligation. The Review recommends keeping this issue under active review and discussing with PCO when the legislation is amended if the possibility of combining payl oad permitting and overseas payload permitting provisions into a single payload permitting requirement is valid. The Act is missing enforcement options for low -level issues without resorting to licence suspension or fines. Space, Policy and Regulatory Team (MBIE) MBIE, in its capacity as the regulator, has not taken any enforcement action under the regime to date and do not envisage needing to if the sector continues to be highly compliant. While the sector has been highly compliant to date, the potential for non -compliant behaviour in future remains a possibility. The Review provides an opportunity to be proactive about ensuring the regulatory levers available enable a proportionate response in the event where non -compliant behaviour warrant s some form of enforcement action, but where suspension or revocation of a licence or permit is not justified. Furthermore, the existence of enforcement levers, even if not used, can have a deterrent effect against non -compliant behaviour arising in the f irst place. The existence of lower -level enforcement options may also help to prevent a regulated party from having their licence revoked or suspended, which may impact on future The Review concludes that a prima facie case exists to support the introduction of lower -level enforcement options, and recommends that MBIE undertakes further policy work to: • Assess options for lower -level enforcement provisions (including, but not necessarily limited to, abatement notices, improvement notices, and enforceable undertakings). If supported by the findings of the policy work, and subject to Ministerial agreement, the lower -level enforcement options would then be included in the Act. • Add the ability to veto individual activities or launches, not just through launch licence conditions. This could be a useful option for when the payload is already in orbit (as revoking a permit at that point is not desirable). • Operation and effectiveness may benefit from consideration of legislative change in the compliance strategy.
LEGISLATIVE ISSUE SUBMITTER ANALYSIS RECOMMENDATIONS The Act does not provide for a situation where a New Zealand entity begins operating a payload launched from overseas that is already in space (eg when a person buys an existing satellite). Space, Policy and Regulatory Team (MBIE) The Review team notes that, there is no provision under the Registration Convention for a state that is not a launching state to register a payload even if its national subsequently acquires an interest in the payload. In these circumstances in international law, the launching state continues to have jurisdiction and control over the payload even if it changes hands in orbit. As a result, space laws in other jurisdictions d o not generally require a licence in these circumstances. However, there may be merit in New Zealand regulating these activities even when is not strictly required under the international law to demonstrate that it is a responsible space actor. We do not a nticipate that the situation will arise very often. The Review recommend s that SPRS monitor developments in other jurisdictions relating to the transfer of satellites in orbit and consider further whether any change is required at the time amending legisla tion is developed.
LEGISLATIVE ISSUE SUBMITTER ANALYSIS RECOMMENDATIONS The Act’s statutory licence conditions are in legislation rather than regulations. This limits the flexibility to update these. Space, Policy and Regulatory Team (MBIE) Since the inception of the Act, a number of ‘standard’ Ministerial conditions have been deemed necessary. These Ministerial conditions can be included as statutory conditions when the legislation is revised. Under the existing settings, licence conditions are prescribed via the Act which limits the flexibility to update them as new information comes to light, or in response to The Review recommends that Ministerial conditions that are routinely imposed be prescribed as statutory conditions. The Review also recomm ends discussion with PCO about whether the statutory conditions are best placed in primary or secondary legislation. LEGISLATIVE ISSUE SUBMITTER ANALYSIS RECOMMENDATIONS The Act is currently lacking key mechanisms to effectively regulate human spaceflight or human high - altitude flight. Space, Policy and Regulatory Team (MBIE) In the US, the advent of commercial sub -orbital flights with passengers has already begun and it is likely that other jurisdictions will follow in the future . The extensive international agreements that regulate aviation and determine key aspects ( such as liability and governance) when dealing with foreign nationals as passengers do not govern this activity, however, they do raise significant questions and decisions for launch ing states seeking to enable this type of activity within their regime. Significant policy work would be required to determine whether, and if so how, to enable this type of activity within New Zealand’s regime. The Review makes no recommendations, on the basis that it would be premature to do so ahead of the policy work bein g undertaken. It seems that changes to primary legislation will be necessary to deal with human spaceflight.
LIABILITY An issue has been raised about whether the current approach to liability and insurance is appropriate, considering the increasing risks of collision in the space environment. LeoLabs
LINZ engages on the use of aerospace technologies to inform land information and management.
LSE 11097MBIE Board Applicant Customer Journey Start of Recruitment Process Appointment Process Completed Induction Provided to AppointeeApplicants Submit their Application via the MBIE Recruitment Portal MBIE sends confirmation to applicants that their application has been received MBIE Provides Shortlisting Advice to the Responsible Minister MBIE informs applicants that shortlisting advice has been provided to the Minister Minister Agrees to Preferred Applicant Cabinet Confirms Preferred Applicant Minister sends letter of appointment to the successful applicantShortlisted Applicants are Interviewed MBIE completes panel interviewsApplications Open MBIE posts role on the vacancies page and advertises on employment websites MBIE notifies people who have registered their interest in board vacancies Applications Close MBIE advises applicants that applications have closed and outlines the next steps Minister Selects Applicants to Shortlist MBIE advises applicants whether the Minister has shortlisted them for an interview MBIE Provides Appointment Advice to the Responsible Minister MBIE advises shortlisted applicants that appointment advice has been given to the Minister Cabinet Consults Appointments and Honours CommitteeThis graphic sets out a typical board appointment process – some recruitments may not follow all of these steps.
Labour & Immigration Policy Branch
Labour Inspectorate complaints
Labour Market Statistics Snapshot
Labour force participation
Labour market forecasting
Labour market reports that are no longer being updated
Labour market reports, data and analysis
Labour provisions in trade agreements help ensure that labour is not exploited for economic benefit. The intent is that this will help enhance the conditions in which people work now and into the future. They also set out areas for cooperation with our trading partners, including sharing information about our experience and best practice, to help improve working conditions.
Labour, Science and Enterprise
Lake Dunstan, Central Otago
Land Information New Zealand
Landcare Research New Zealand Limited (Manaaki Whenua)
Landcare Research New Zealand Limited is a Crown research institute. Its purpose is to drive innovation in New Zealand's management of terrestrial biodiversity and land resources to both protect and enhance the terrestrial environment and grow New Zealand's prosperity.
Language Assistance Services
Language Assistance Services - Handbook for users 2024
Language Assistance Services - Operational policy for New Zealand public sector agencies and those they fund
Language Assistance Services. Handbook for users 2024. [PDF 1.4MB]
Language Assistance Services. Operational policy for New Zealand public sector agencies and those they fund 2024. [PDF 1.7MB]
Language assistance available
Language assistance services handbook
Language assistance services operational policy
Language assistance services wallet card
Language support is available when accessing many government services. The Ministry for Ethnic Communities has online resources to show people how to ask for an interpreter. This is available in 24 languages.
Large film and television productions:
Large organisations and those with control over New Zealand employers would be required to undertake due diligence.
Last amended: 11 November 2015
Last amended: 11 October 2013
Last amended: 13 May 2020
Last amended: 18 January 2016
Last amended: 2 February 2016
Last amended: 21 August 2019
Last amended: 29 February 2016
Last amended: 29 November 2009
Last amended: 29 September 2015
Last amended: 9 September 2019
Last amended: September 2015
Last reviewed: 01 May 2024
Last reviewed: 06 November 2023
Last reviewed: 12 September 2024
Last reviewed: 16 August 2022
Last reviewed: 19 September 2023
Last updated: 01 April 2025
Last updated: 01 August 2023
Last updated: 01 February 2022
Last updated: 01 February 2024
Last updated: 01 July 2021
Last updated: 01 May 2024
Last updated: 01 May 2025
Last updated: 01 November 2024
Last updated: 01 October 2024
Last updated: 02 August 2023
Last updated: 02 August 2024
Last updated: 02 December 2022
Last updated: 02 December 2024
Last updated: 02 February 2022
Last updated: 02 July 2024
Last updated: 02 May 2025
Last updated: 02 October 2020
Last updated: 02 October 2024
Last updated: 02 September 2024
Last updated: 03 April 2025
Last updated: 03 February 2021
Last updated: 03 March 2022
Last updated: 03 May 2022
Last updated: 04 April 2022
Last updated: 04 August 2020
Last updated: 04 June 2021
Last updated: 04 June 2024
Last updated: 04 March 2024
Last updated: 04 May 2023
Last updated: 04 October 2022
Last updated: 04 September 2023
Last updated: 05 August 2024
Last updated: 05 January 2024
Last updated: 05 March 2024
Last updated: 05 March 2025
Last updated: 05 November 2020
Last updated: 06 August 2024
Last updated: 06 December 2022
Last updated: 06 July 2023
Last updated: 06 June 2024
Last updated: 06 May 2024
Last updated: 06 October 2023
Last updated: 07 April 2025
Last updated: 07 February 2019
Last updated: 07 March 2025
Last updated: 08 April 2021
Last updated: 08 August 2023
Last updated: 08 August 2024
Last updated: 08 December 2021
Last updated: 08 March 2024
Last updated: 08 October 2020
Last updated: 08 October 2024
Last updated: 09 April 2024
Last updated: 09 August 2024
Last updated: 09 March 2022
Last updated: 09 October 2024
Last updated: 10 April 2025
Last updated: 10 March 2023
Last updated: 10 March 2025
Last updated: 10 September 2024
Last updated: 11 December 2019
Last updated: 11 October 2023
Last updated: 11 September 2024
Last updated: 12 April 2022
Last updated: 12 August 2022
Last updated: 12 December 2018
Last updated: 12 December 2023
Last updated: 12 February 2025
Last updated: 12 July 2024
Last updated: 12 June 2024
Last updated: 12 March 2025
Last updated: 12 May 2020
Last updated: 12 November 2024
Last updated: 13 December 2024
Last updated: 13 February 2024
Last updated: 13 January 2025
Last updated: 13 March 2025
Last updated: 13 September 2021
Last updated: 13 September 2024
Last updated: 14 April 2022
Last updated: 14 February 2019
Last updated: 14 February 2024
Last updated: 14 January 2025
Last updated: 14 June 2024
Last updated: 14 March 2022
Last updated: 14 May 2024
Last updated: 15 April 2025
Last updated: 15 February 2023
Last updated: 15 May 2023
Last updated: 15 November 2024
Last updated: 16 April 2025
Last updated: 16 August 2022
Last updated: 16 August 2023
Last updated: 16 August 2024
Last updated: 16 February 2021
Last updated: 16 July 2020
Last updated: 16 May 2023
Last updated: 16 September 2021
Last updated: 17 December 2019
Last updated: 17 December 2020
Last updated: 17 December 2024
Last updated: 17 June 2024
Last updated: 17 March 2021
Last updated: 17 March 2025
Last updated: 17 September 2024
Last updated: 18 August 2023
Last updated: 18 December 2024
Last updated: 18 March 2024
Last updated: 18 March 2025
Last updated: 18 May 2023
Last updated: 18 October 2021
Last updated: 18 October 2024
Last updated: 18 September 2024
Last updated: 19 December 2024
Last updated: 19 July 2024
Last updated: 19 March 2025
Last updated: 20 April 2021
Last updated: 20 December 2021
Last updated: 20 December 2023
Last updated: 20 February 2025
Last updated: 21 August 2019
Last updated: 21 December 2021
Last updated: 21 January 2025
Last updated: 21 May 2024
Last updated: 21 October 2024
Last updated: 22 December 2022
Last updated: 22 March 2022
Last updated: 22 May 2024
Last updated: 22 October 2021
Last updated: 23 December 2021
Last updated: 23 December 2022
Last updated: 23 February 2021
Last updated: 23 January 2025
Last updated: 23 July 2024
Last updated: 23 November 2020
Last updated: 24 April 2024
Last updated: 24 April 2025
Last updated: 24 December 2024
Last updated: 24 January 2023
Last updated: 24 July 2019
Last updated: 24 July 2024
Last updated: 24 June 2021
Last updated: 24 March 2025
Last updated: 24 May 2023
Last updated: 24 October 2023
Last updated: 25 February 2025
Last updated: 25 January 2022
Last updated: 25 July 2022
Last updated: 25 March 2025
Last updated: 25 October 2023
Last updated: 25 September 2024
Last updated: 26 August 2022
Last updated: 26 February 2025
Last updated: 26 July 2022
Last updated: 26 June 2024
Last updated: 26 May 2022
Last updated: 26 May 2023
Last updated: 26 October 2023
Last updated: 27 February 2024
Last updated: 27 February 2025
Last updated: 27 July 2024
Last updated: 27 June 2024
Last updated: 27 November 2024
Last updated: 27 October 2021
Last updated: 28 April 2025
Last updated: 28 August 2023
Last updated: 28 August 2024
Last updated: 28 February 2024
Last updated: 28 June 2023
Last updated: 28 May 2021
Last updated: 28 May 2024
Last updated: 28 November 2023
Last updated: 28 November 2024
Last updated: 29 April 2025
Last updated: 29 January 2025
Last updated: 29 July 2020
Last updated: 29 March 2023
Last updated: 29 November 2021
Last updated: 29 November 2024
Last updated: 30 April 2025
Last updated: 30 August 2024
Last updated: 30 June 2021
Last updated: 30 June 2023
Last updated: 30 November 2023
Last updated: 30 October 2024
Last updated: 30 September 2024
Last updated: 31 August 2023
Last updated: 31 January 2025
Last updated: 31 July 2024
Last updated: 31 March 2025
Last updated: 31 May 2023
Last updated: 31 October 2024
Last year I got to use both these things.
Late in 2023, MBIE commissioned Gravitas OPG to undertake a review of how the rapid building assessment system worked during the response. The aim of the review was to confirm that the agencies and organisations involved met their responsibilities under the legislation.
Later in 2024, all nominated participants and their institutions will receive an update on their final decision on participant selection, which is made at the discretion of the GYSS Organising Committee. Please note that an MBIE nomination does not guarantee an invitation to participate in GYSS 2025. Nominees who do not complete the registration will also be disqualified.
Latest COVID-19 economic data
Latest Official Information Act releases
Latest energy balance tables for New Zealand, showing how energy supply and demand by sector varies by energy fuel type
Latest proactive releases
Launch and/or operation of satellites and/or spacecraft
Launch the New Zealand Sectors Dashboard
Law change brings new decommissioning obligations and added enforcement
Law change for Easter Sunday shop trading
Law, Politics & Social Services
Lawyers as gatekeepers to commercial mediation in New Zealand (2016)
Leaders and champions are required across all aspects of destinations, and partnerships and collaboration are important for success. A focus and commitment to building DM knowledge and capability across all entities involved in supporting the destination is important.
Leaders of the group agreed to set up the taskforce at the second summit in 2007 when they adopted the
Leadership Development Centre
Leadership and structures
Leadership demands nothing less.
Learn about the establishment of Managed Isolation and Quarantine (MIQ), and the important role it played in protecting our people from a largely unknown, rapidly evolving virus. MIQ was one of the hardest parts of the pandemic, but it saved lives.
Learn more about past NASA intern experiences
Learn more about the Matariki holiday and celebration
Learning from similar systems overseas
Learning modules for public servants about interpreting services
Learning modules for public servants who work with communities
Leave entitlements under the current Holidays Act
Leave history per entitlement year  Date and amount of payment representing PAYG under section 28 of the Act  Portion of annual holidays that have been paid as PAYG expressed in weeks or portions of w eeks  For PAYG employees, a record of the quarterly review of working pattern to determine if the employee was still eligible for PAYG  Date and amount of payment for cashed -out annual holidays  Portion of annual holidays that have been cashed out in each ent itlement year, expressed in weeks or portions of weeks
Leave methodologies (directly in the section or referenced to another part of the Act)  Which leave methodologies (under which section of the Act) that have been applied to any portion of leave take n, [e.g. the methodology applied to determine average working week, including reference periods, equations, shift cycles, etc. ] Quarterly review of employees ’ working arrangement (for PAYG, sick, bereavement and family violence leave eligibility purpose s)  Date on which quarterly review carried out  Calculation used and r esult of quarterly review for PAYG eligibility (if applicable) and any changes to entitlements resulting from the review  Calculation used and r esult of quarterly review for sick, bereaveme nt and family violence leave eligibility and any changes to entitlements resulting from the review Termination records  Date of termination of employment  Holiday pay paid upon termination of employment Corrections  Notation of any corrections to previo us payslips, including references to payslip number, methodologies an d data that have been corrected
Leave without pay: When an employer allows an employee time off work when they would otherwise be working, but does not pay t hem for this time (Section 16 of the Act ).
Led by Associate Professor at Otago University Jevon Longdell
Led by Dr Delwyn Moller, CEO ReSTORe Lab Ltd, Wanaka, New Zealand
Led by Dr Nicholas Rattenbury, from the Department of Physics in the Faculty of Science.
Led by Stefan Powell, CEO and CTO of Dawn Aerospace.
Legal and Trading names (this needs to match invoices you send us)
Legal requirements Outer Space and High-altitude Activities Act 2017 Applicants must produce a safety case as required by the regulations if applying for any of the following licence types: ȓ Launch licence or overseas launch licence ȓ Facility licence; and ȓ High-altitude licence. If applicants have a launch licence issued by an international regulator, and they are seeking to have that recognised by MBIE, and that licence is subject to specific public safety duties that are consistent with New Zealand’s own regulations, the Minister may take this into account. The applicant should contact MBIE to discuss this, if that is the case. If the applicant is a person conducting a business or undertaking in New Zealand, they will have additional workplace safety duties. Applicants should refer to WorkSafe and the Health & Safety at Work Act 2015 to ensure full awareness of workplace health and safety duties. Additionally, a number of the Health & Safety at Work regulations may be relevant and again the applicant should ensure full awareness of their duties, and compliance with these regulations. WorkSafe New Zealand is New Zealand’s primary workplace health and safety regulator. Outer Space and High-altitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulations 2017 The regulations require that the following must be included in the applicant’s safety case: ȓ a description of the activities proposed under the ȓ details of all relevant New Zealand and international licence to which the safety case relates; standards that have been applied or will be applied in relation to the safety of the activity;ȓ a description of any systems that have the purpose of preventing, or limiting the effect of, risks to ȓ a description of the systems that the applicant public safety and the failure of which could cause or has implemented, or intends to implement, for contribute substantially to a serious risk to public the purpose of ensuring that the activities under safety; the licence are conducted in a manner that does not create a significant risk of serious harm to anyȓ a description of the arrangements in place to verify member of the public or significant damage tothat the systems described are or will be suitable property owned by a person other than the licensee;and will remain in good condition for the duration of the licence; ȓ provides details of the key personnel responsible for the safety of the proposed activities under theȓ a safety assessment that provides for the licence;identification of any serious risks to public safety associated with the activity, the nature of each ȓ includes an emergency plan that effectively risk, including the likelihood and consequences addresses all serious risks to public safety of an (including the potential magnitude and severity of accident, is specific to the proposed activities under the potential consequences), the geographical areas the licence and the serious risks to public safety likely to be affected by the activity and, if relevant, (if any) identified in the safety assessment, is demographic information about the local community integrated into the applicant’s safety management that may be affected by them and the measures that systems, is understandable by workers, visitors, the applicant has implemented, or will implement, to and other people who are likely to be affected and minimise the risks to public safety; provides for the testing, review, and updating of emergency procedures (including the frequency of any testing, review, and updating). 3
Legal, Ethics and Privacy.
Legislation Design and Advisory Committee Guidelines
Legislation reinstating petroleum exploration has been introduced by the Coalition Government.
Legislation takes effect.
Legislation we administer
Lesly Van Nijilen, Organic Exporters NZ
Lessons learnt from the earthquakes
Letter from Carolyn Tremain of MBIE to Peter Hughes following the completion of the external review into how the non-interference provisions of the Crown Minerals Act are effected
Letter from Chief Executive, MBIE to State Services Commissioner setting out MBIE response to issues raised by the Commissioner relating to the All of Government Protective Security Panel.
Letter from State Services Commissioner to Carolyn Tremain as Chief Executive of MBIE
Letter from State Services Commissioner to Carolyn Tremain as Functional Leader of Government Procur...
Letter to Callaghan Innovation Board Chair
Letter to Callaghan Innovation Chair - further expectations regarding the disestablishment of Callaghan Innovation
Letter to Enable Networks approving deed
Letter to State Services Commissioner from Carolyn Tremain as Chief Executive of MBIE
Letter to State Services Commissioner from Carolyn Tremain as Functional Leader of Government Procur...
Letter to Telecom approving the Copper and Fibre Deeds
Letter to Telecom approving the Rural Broadband Initiative Deed
Letter to Ultrafast Broadband Limited approving deed
Letter to Vodafone approving deed
Letter to Whangarei Local Fibre Company approving deed
Letter to WorkSafe New Zealand Chair re Strategic Baseline Review [PDF 272KB]
Letter to the New Zealand Telecommunications Forum on Crown Fibre Holdings role clarity outcomes and price setting on the ultra-fast broadband network
Letter: Update on external review into how the non-interference provisions of the Crown Minerals Act...
Letters from the Minister of Communications and Information Technology approving the deeds:
Letters must not exceed 260 mm in height, 385 mm in length, 20 mm in thickness, or 1 kg in weight. (Note: this is the updated definition of a letter, amended in 2017.)
Levy portion for plug-in hybrids and battery electric vehicles
Liability Indemnity and Insurance Operational Policy [PDF 181KB]
Licence for an overseas launch If the applicant is applying for an overseas launch licence, in addition to the information required above, the applic ant must provide: • the name and location of the overseas launch facility from which the launch vehicle will be launched; and • the name, principal business address, and place of organisation or incorporation of the owner of the overseas launch facility. Information for payload permits Information about the payload • A summary of the payload mission and purpose, including a description of the system the payload is part of, for example a constellation of satellites or other similar system. • Expected operational l ife of the payload. • If known at the time of application, for each proposed launch(es) of a payload(s) under the permit, state the anticipated start date(s) and duration of the launch window(s) and location of the launch(es), • Details of the intended orbital parameters (including the nodal period, inclination, apogee and perigee) of the payload. • In relation to the payload and, if applicable, spacecraft bus : o The primary place of manufacture/assembly o The name of the organisation • In relation to the payload integrator (if different from payload owner) : o Name o Place of organisation or incorporation o Place of integration • A description of the protective security (including cyber security) measures or policies (if any) in place to protect the: o payload command and c ontrol systems, o unenhanced/raw remote sensing data, and o systems commanding remote sensing systems and sensor tasking.
Licence type Granted Variations granted Payload Permits 70 5 Overseas Payload Permits 3 0 Launch Licences 2 5 Overseas Launch Licences 0 0 Facility Licences 1 0 High -altitude Licences 3 1 DECLINING AN APPLICATION OR IMPOSING CONDITIONS 30. For each licence and permit type, provisions within the Act set the parameters for entry into and ongoing lawful operation in respect to activities carried out under New Zealand’s jurisdiction for outer space and the high -altitude environment. I n particular, this includes provisions for: • Criteria which must be satisfied in order for the Minister to grant a licence or permit – such as consistency with international obligations. • Grounds on which an application may be declined - such as national interest considerations. • Conditions which may be imposed – such as incident reporting requirements. 31. As of 28 April 2022 , no applications for licences or permits have been declined, and every payload permit and licence has had ministerial conditions impos ed. There are now a number of conditions which have become standard for all payload permits. VARYING, SUSPENDING OR REVOKING PERMITS AND LICENCES 32. The Act prescribes the grounds on which the Minister may vary, suspend, or revoke a licence or permit that ha s been granted. This may be initiated by the licensee or the Minister may invoke these powers of their own accord in certain circumstances. For example, if the Minister believes on reasonable grounds that the revocation, variation or suspension of a launch licence is necessary in the interests of national security, public safety, compliance with any of New Zealand’s international obligations or other national interests . 33. Since the inception of the Act, the revocation power ha s only been invoked on one occasi on. In this case, the Minister revoked the licence (a high -altitude licence) at the request of the licensee. That licence holder has since applied for (and received) a subsequent high -altitude licence for the next generation of their vehicle. 34. The Minister has regularly varied permits and licences. For payload permits this has generally occurred at the permit holder’s request to allow the launch of additional identical payloads. Rocket Lab ’s Launch licence s have been varied several times to allow for new capabilities, most notabl y, Rocket Lab’s plans to recover the first stage of the launch vehicle.
Licensed Building Practitioners
Licensed building practitioners
Licensing system for refrigeration, heating and air conditioning technicians
Like Australia, a regulator will be established to allow New Zealand to manage the risks of these technologies.
Limitations of scenario modelling
Limiting human bias from a process
Linked changes will be made to the Audit Standard and guidance materials to provide information on good practice for communicating risks and what information should be provided to participants.
Links from other sites to this one
Links to other websites should not be taken as endorsement or recommendation of those sites or products offered on those sites. This includes websites that may host our content (eg, video files on YouTube). We don't endorse advertising, related material, or other content you may view on such sites while accessing our content.
Links to the schedules are provided below:
Links to third party websites
Liquid fuels use in New Zealand
List of all approved payloads to 31 December 2024
List of community languages
List of documents that have been proactively released Date Title Author August 2024 Holidays Act Reform: Consultation document for targeted consultation Office of Workplace Relations and Safety Minister August 2024 Appendix Two: Summary of key proposals and alternative options included in the consultation document Office of Workplace Relations and Safety Minister 28 August 2024 Holidays Act Reform: Approval to Consult ECO -24-MIN-0177 Minute Cabinet Office 17 June 2024 2324 -3811 Holidays Act Reform: Decisions on sick leave for the exposure draft MBIE
List of documents that have been proactively released Date Title Author March 2020 Cabinet Paper: Government Response to the Report of the Holidays Act Taskforce Office of the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety March 2020 Cabinet paper Annex One: Summary of Government response to Holidays Act Taskforce recommendations MBIE October 2019 Cabinet paper Annex 2: Holidays Act Taskforce final report (note this documents will also be published separately on the MBIE website when your announcement is made Holidays Act Taskforce March 2020 Regulatory Impact Statement – Improving the Holidays Act 2003 MBIE 11 March 2020 DEV-20-MIN-0035: Government Response to the Report of the Holidays Act Taskforce Cabinet Office
List of documents that have been proactively released Date Title Author May 2024 Holidays Act Reform: Further Policy Decisions Office of Workplace Relations and Safety Minister 10 May 2024 Regulatory Impact Statement: Holidays Act reform – Further Policy Decisions MBIE 22 May 2024 Holidays Act Reform: Further Policy Decisions – Minute of Decision ECO -24-MIN-0081 Minute Cabinet Office 21 Dec 2023 Holidays Act Review: background, progress and next steps MBIE 28 Mar 2024 Holidays Act Review: Policy decisions for an exposure draft of the Bill MBIE
List of participating agencies
Listed industry bodies only. Partnering with other industry bodies, RTOs and others (for example, non-governmental organisations (NGOs), academia) is encouraged.
Listen to New Zealand researchers share their personal career journey and thoughts on what progress has been made to promote diversity and what more can be done.
Lists of Ministerial documents by portfolio
Live and work New Zealand
Loan administration costs
Local authorities have the ability to set, add to, or change the provincial anniversary day holidays. It is up to the relevant local authorities to decide whether or not to move South Canterbury Day.
Local government guidance [PDF, 649KB]
Local hotel accommodation for overseas-based participants (twin sharing from 6-10 January 2025)
Local insights report: December 2023
Local insights report: June 2023
Local insights report: November 2023
Local insights report: October and November 2023
Local insights report: October/November 2023
Local insights report: September 2023
Local policies cannot control or override shop trading provisions in other legislation, such as defining specific opening hours, liquor licensing provisions or determining what types of shops may open.
Local policies of individual councils
Locally engaged employees offshore are covered by local legislation and their employment agreements.
Long-term Insights Briefings
Long-term Insights Briefings - public consultations
Long-term insights briefings
Long-term insights briefings are a new statutory process under the Public Service Act 2020. They are future-focused, providing information about medium and long-term trends, risks and opportunities, including analysis and policy options for responding.
Long-term sustainable funding mechanisms
Looking to connect your research group or business with local partners?
Loose cords on window coverings, such as roller blinds, concertina blinds, Roman blinds and slatted blinds like Venetian blinds, are dangerous for young children, because they can get entangled and strangled by the operating cords or inner cords.
Low (left) to high (right)
Low hydro lake levels require continued reliance on coal and gas for electricity
Low inflation, low interest rates and good fiscal management create the conditions for growth. Stability in these settings provides certainty for businesses and households, supporting their investment and long-term decision-making.
Low pay in New Zealand report
MBIE & Vodafone Rural Broadband Agreement
MBIE Chorus Updated Agreement
MBIE Code of Conduct 2015
MBIE Diversity, Equity and Inclusion Plan 2024-2025
MBIE Evidence and Insights
MBIE Flexible Working Policy for staff
MBIE Flexible Working Policy for staff.
MBIE Horizon Europe top-up funding scheme
MBIE Science Whitinga Fellowship
MBIE Science and Innovation Funding Agencies: The Royal Society of New Zealand
MBIE Suppliers information
MBIE accepts eInvoices. We prefer you to send us eInvoices instead of sending PDFs via email. Sending eInvoices helps us process and pay your invoices more efficiently.
MBIE advises applicants of the outcome, and releases summaries of payloads permitted in the previous quarter.
MBIE also aims to apply a continuous improvement mindset by analysing feedback and complaints data to identify:
MBIE also provided the Select Committee with additional information after the hearing to respond to their questions. The full evidence text is available at:
MBIE also publishes Contract award notices on GETS for contracts in accordance with the Government Procurement Rules.
MBIE and DIA worked with interpreters, other government agencies using interpreting services, Universities and Technical Institutes who deliver interpreter training, the New Zealand Society of Translators and Interpreters (NZSTI) and NAATI to develop the package to support New Zealand interpreters to transition to the NAATI accreditation system.
MBIE and DLR have now agreed to jointly support a set of 8 research projects, with the New Zealand research teams receiving a total of NZ$8 million (GST excluded) over 3 years.
MBIE and Data Ventures have worked together to produce estimates for monthly unique local and visitor populations in each RTO in New Zealand.
MBIE and MFAT will seek further feedback on a draft of the Briefing later in 2025 before finalising the Briefing and presenting it to Parliament before the end of the year.
MBIE appoints the panel, which includes:
MBIE board applicant customer journey
MBIE can nominate up to 15 people. Spots will be allocated on a first-come-first-served basis. MBIE will upload these details to the GYSS portal and nominees will be contacted by the GYSS Organising Committee (via the submitted email address) in September 2024 to provide further registration details. This may include uploading an endorsement letter from their supervisor or academic mentor, describing:
MBIE cannot grant permission to reproduce such material: you must obtain permission from the copyright holders themselves.
MBIE carried out a targeted consultation with stakeholders over mid-March to mid-April 2023.
MBIE commenced the review of the RSE policy in late 2022.
MBIE commissioned an independent review to assess whether WorkSafe is managing its resources efficiently and effectively, and provide advice on the rationale, quantum and targeting of any additional funding which may be required.
MBIE commissioned research company Colmar-Brunton to ask three key questions relating to ticket reselling as part of one of their fortnightly omnibus-type surveys.
MBIE commissioned research report on the critical success factors that promote financial capability amongst Pacific communities in Aotearoa New Zealand.
MBIE commissions and writes reports about the science system.
MBIE communicates with you at each stage of the recruitment process, and lets you know if you have been shortlisted by the responsible Minister.
MBIE conducted 2 surveys to collect information about our RSI workforce. The surveys were designed to better understand the demographic characteristics, skills and workplace practices of people who contribute to our RSI system as well as the challenges they face.
MBIE considers the independent report, as well as cost estimates and other policy considerations, to inform recommendations to the Minister for ACC on proposed changes to Schedule 2.
MBIE creates a list of stakeholders
MBIE departmental change processes
MBIE develops and delivers policy, services, advice and regulation to support economic growth and the prosperity and wellbeing of New Zealanders.
MBIE develops and delivers policy, services, advice, and regulation to support economic growth and the prosperity and wellbeing of New Zealanders. MBIE combines the former Ministries of Economic Development, Science and Innovation, and the Departments of Labour and Building and Housing. MORE INFORMATION Information, examples, and answers to your questions about the topics covered here can be found on our website: www.mbie.govt.nz or by calling us free on: 0800 20 90 20. DISCLAIMER This document is a guide only. It should not be used as a substitute for legislation or legal advice. The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment is not responsible for the results of any actions taken on the basis of information in this document, or for any errors or omissions.
MBIE encourages territorial authorities to consider the conclusions of the report and the best practice service provision suggestions as part of their readiness planning for future events.
MBIE guiding principles relevant to this policy
MBIE has a responsibility to keep people in New Zealand safe and to prevent harm, such as in the employment, immigration, and consumer protection contexts. In situations where MBIE is seeking to prevent, or address, significant harm we may consider it appropriate to undertake information gathering activity that has an increased impact on an individual or organisation.
MBIE has been sourcing, analysing and interpreting a wide range of data related to the impact of COVID-19 and on recovery options. This includes real time and historic data about the economy across a range of areas.
MBIE has been utilising Connecting Now as a single provider while the panel procurement has been underway. Connecting Now also went through the procurement process to continue providing services as a panel member.
MBIE has begun reporting on energy hardship levels in Aotearoa. The first report is available on the Report on Energy Hardship Measures webpage.
MBIE has commissioned research on how Aotearoa New Zealand can reduce emissions, and lift the value derived from our biological resources.
MBIE has completed the Domestic Demand Review into whether funding domestic tourism marketing is an appropriate ongoing function for Government in the medium to long term.
MBIE has done extensive testing and is fully confident in the robustness of all Jobs Online data. However, because of the minor changes noted above, users are advised to re-download the full data series rather than just appending the latest data point.
MBIE has established a new national model for agencies to access face to face interpreting services more effectively and efficiently across New Zealand.
MBIE has incorporated the areas identified for improvement in the review into the 2024-2025 continuous improvement programme. The actions identified include:
MBIE has policy responsibility for the GDSR while NZ On Air administers this rebate.
MBIE has redeveloped the Jobs Online data processing pipeline. The switch to the new process has not resulted in any major changes to the Jobs Online data series.
MBIE has started identifying amendments for a fourth set of Bills. At this stage, the timeline for progressing a fourth set of bills has yet to be confirmed.
MBIE has started work to analyse the request and prepare a report for consideration by the Minister of Workplace Relations and Safety, as set out in section 237A of the ERA.
MBIE has taken a number of steps to address safety issues with these products, including engaging with retailers, manufacturers, suppliers and community organisations, as well as consumer promotions.
MBIE has undertaken a review to assess if any adjustments to the maximum amounts payable are required to take into account increases in the costs of undertaking a review.
MBIE intends to ensure that information about any changes to the Holidays Act is available to employers, employees and payroll providers as soon as practical after a Bill is passed, and before it comes into force.
MBIE intends to use this consultation process, along with further research, to develop a better understanding of the nature and scale of the problem, the options, benefits, costs and other impacts of the options, and implementation.
MBIE introduced narrative CVs as an option for funding applications, which are common in the UK, the Netherlands, Ireland, Switzerland and Luxemburg. Other jurisdictions have been introducing narrative CVs as funding processes evolve.
MBIE is 1 of 4 newly designated agencies. The others are Department of Internal Affairs, New Zealand Customs Service, and Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade. Other CWPAs include government agencies, for example Oranga Tamariki and NZ Police and non-government organisations such as recognised Iwi authorities and health practitioners.
MBIE is also consulting on proposed changes to the adventure activities regulatory regime.
MBIE is committed to achieving broader cultural, economic, environmental, and social outcomes when purchasing goods, services or works. Government Procurement Rules and policy requires us to consider how we can create opportunities for New Zealand businesses.
MBIE is committed to being the place where people want to work, by attracting and retaining skilled people who are engaged in safe and fulfilling work.
MBIE is consulting on options for updating the Review Costs Regulations, which outline the costs payable to ACC claimants who seek a review of an ACC decision.
MBIE is grateful to everyone who supported the RSLG function with their time and expertise.
MBIE is hosting an information webinar for RTOs on Monday 24 February 2025. Invitations have been sent directly to these organisations.
MBIE is leading a policy and operational review of Temporary Migrant Worker Exploitation in New Zealand.
MBIE is leading an independent review of whether WorkSafe has carried out its obligations appropriately in relation to Whakaari/White Island.
MBIE is one of the biggest regulatory departments in New Zealand. About three-quarters of what we do relates to designing and delivering regulatory systems. We are responsible for stewardship of 112 statutes.
MBIE is providing a top-up funding scheme for overhead costs to support New Zealand researchers and organisations participating in Horizon Europe projects.
MBIE is responsible for administering certain aspects of the KiwiSaver Act 2006.
MBIE is seeking feedback on proposed design features of the Game Development Sector Rebate.
MBIE is seeking feedback to inform further advice to the Government on proposed changes to the Skilled Migrant Category residence visa.
MBIE is sourcing, analysing and interpreting a wide range of data for sectors and regions as part of the response to COVID-19.
MBIE is sourcing, analysing and interpreting a wide range of data for sectors and regions as part of the response to COVID-19. These make use of historical data to understand context as well as incorporating novel data sources available in real time. A range of resources are compiled to support policy advice and monitoring and provide the evidence base for the recovery phase.
MBIE is supporting New Zealand to take a strategic approach to Artificial Intelligence (AI).
MBIE is working closely with the Crown Research Institutes on proposals for merging into their new configurations as early as 1 October, ahead of legislation to formally establish the PROs. Two independent convenors have been appointed to lead the mergers for the bioeconomy and earth science PROs. These convenors will ensure the needs of the new entities are at the forefront throughout the merger process. Two governance groups, comprising the relevant Chairs and convenor for each PRO, have also been established. Part of this process will include work to ensure aligned science capability is brought together for maximum impact.
MBIE issued a discussion document in 2019 which set out a wide range of potential options for change.
MBIE manages board appointment processes for a large number of Crown entities, Crown entity companies, statutory bodies and advisory boards on behalf of responsible Ministers.
MBIE may request, from the person or organisation that made the submission, additional information that is necessary to consider the substance of the submission.
MBIE now has the ability to voluntarily request and disclose personal information with other CWPAs for specified purposes relating to the safety and wellbeing of any child or young person.
MBIE operational description
MBIE plays a central role in shaping and delivering a strong New Zealand economy.
MBIE prepared a full Regulatory Impact Statement (RIS) which accompanied the Cabinet paper that sought agreement to endorse the
MBIE previously consulted on BNPL in late 2021. This consultation focussed on understanding how BNPL could trigger financial hardship for consumers, to inform how to achieve an effective BNPL sector - one where the risks of financial hardship are balanced against the benefits of BNPL.
MBIE procures a literature review of the relevant clinical and epidemiological evidence for occupational diseases, and the independent selection and management of medical experts to assess the evidence of listed diseases against the technical criteria.
MBIE produces these snapshots after each new release of the Labour Market Statistics, published by Stats NZ every November, February, May and August.
MBIE provides Secretariat services to the Taskforce.
MBIE provides Secretariat support to the Council.
MBIE provides a weekly report to the Minister for Energy, here you can find our weekly reports from April 2024 onwards. We release these reports on a monthly basis
MBIE provides a weekly report to the Minister for Energy, here you can find our weekly reports from April 2024 onwards. We release these reports on a monthly basis.
MBIE released an exposure draft of the proposed Health and Safety at Work (Adventure Activities) Amendment Regulations 2023. This feedback was sought to ensure the changes would work as intended.
MBIE reports annually on the implementation and interactions resulting from this Policy in our Annual Plan through MBIE's designated Policy Owner for this Child Protection Policy, the General Manager, Refugee and Migrant Services, Immigration New Zealand.
MBIE reserve the right to audit its service providers to check if they have an appropriate child protection policy in place or have adapted and applied the MBIE policy as appropriate.
MBIE science grants diversity data
MBIE shares data with domestic and international agencies to support and sustain good public services for New Zealanders.
MBIE staff, contractors and consultants are bound by the standards outlined in the MBIE Code of Conduct (the Code).
MBIE stands up Gas Security Response Group
MBIE supported the Modern Slavery and Worker Exploitation Advisory Group to produce its third annual awareness-raising newsletter. It was disseminated electronically this year, and promoted during a Social Justice event at the Wellington Anglican Diocese in August.
MBIE top-up funding scheme
MBIE uses data to help inform, improve, and deliver the important services we provide to people in Aotearoa New Zealand and internationally. While MBIE decisions are largely made and reviewed by people, algorithms play a role in distilling information from large or complex data sets to support human decision-making and reveal insights that could not easily be revealed by human analysis alone. Human oversight is maintained at an appropriate level in our use of algorithms to ensure the data we use is being used safely and effectively.
MBIE usually lets nominating agencies know when it has a board vacancy. This is another way you may find out there is a suitable board vacancy.
MBIE will likely be invited to nominate people to attend GYSS 2026 around July 2025. If you are interested, please keep an eye on this webpage.
MBIE will play a key role in carrying out the Review, but a number of key components will be delivered externally, including to ensure the right level of technical input and other expertise informs the Review.
MBIE will record all formal flexible working arrangement proposals and the outcome of those proposals.
MBIE will then send information (including a Price Book) to help you decide whether you should join the agreement, and a Participating Agency Agreement (PAA) to populate and send back to
MBIE will track the num ber and types of queries to the MBIE contact centre, the Labour Inspectorate and our websites (business.govt.nz and employment.govt.nz) in relation to the Holidays Act. The number and types of breaches resulting from Labour Inspectorate activities, as well
MBIE's Energy Use Newsletter provides updates from the Energy Markets branch on issues relating to:
MBIE's Long-term Insights Briefing was submitted for Select Committee consideration in November 2022.
MBIE's Prosecution policy sets out MBIE's expectations and rules governing prosecutions decision making and prosecution proceedings.
MBIE's gender pay and ethnic action plan 2018-2021 [PDF 735KB]
MBIE's public consultations
MBIE's transparency statement describes the kind of information MBIE gathers to ensure it can effectively:
MBIE's use of security guards [PDF 2.5MB]
MBIE, in conjunction with ACC, conducts a biennial review of the Cost of Treatment Regulations.
MBIE’s Regulatory Impact Analysis Review Panel has reviewed the Impact Statement. The panel considers that the information and analysis summarised in the Impact Statement meets the criteria necessary for Ministers to make informed decisions on the proposals in this paper. The panel notes the technical nature of the proposed changes and the intention to con sult. It will be important for the consultation document to set out the issues in a clear and accessible way.
MFAT contributes to the development of international space policy, including engagement on space security, from space debris to the weaponisation of space, through United Nations space fora and engagement with international partners.
MFAT has established a NZD $8.2 million programme with Tearfund for 2021-2026 to connect community-based livelihoods work with an anti-trafficking programme. Implementation in Solomon Islands, Fiji, Vanuatu and Sri Lanka has begun.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 10 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 35. The Minister has not revoked any payload permits (New Zealand based), overseas payload permits, launch licences, o r facility licences.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 11 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 • MBIE ’s responsibilities as steward of the regulatory system, including monitoring safety culture . • MBIE’s risk -averse a pproach to compliance . • Assurance measures for each licen ce or permit type under the Act. Preventative action and managing relationships 40. While statutory levers to enforce compliance, and address non -compliance, are available in the regime if needed, the day -to-day work of MBIE focuses on preventative steps which mitigate the likelihood that enforcement action will be required and help regulated parties to comply. These include: • Regular engagement with the only launch licence hol der (Rocket Lab) to ensure they are aware of their obligations, and to provide clarity on which agency holds which regulatory responsibilities under the Act . • Publication of educational and guidance material, such as operational policies, to provide guidanc e to regulated parties and applicants . • Engagement with payload permit applicants prior to their applications being accepted to help ensure the applicants are aware of the requirements under the Act . • Regular communication with regulated parties and applicants. 41. Within the regime, and at its boundary with other systems, there are multiple regulators with overlapping mandates . As steward of this regulatory system, MBIE has taken steps to mitigate risks of either duplication of effort or gaps, such as: • Undertaking a ‘regulatory mapping’ exercise to determine who is responsible for which regulatory functions under OSHAA . • Entering into a Memorandum of Cooperation (MoC) with the New Zealand Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) and a separate MoC with the United States Federa l Aviation Administration (FAA) ; • Developing MoCs (or equivalent) with WorkSafe New Zealand, the New Zealand Security Intelligence Service, and the New Zealand Police. 3. APPROACH TO THE REVIEW 3.1. SCOPE 42. The Terms of Reference (see Annex Three ) set out the agreed scope of the statutory review. 43. Section 86 of the OSHAA prescribes that the Minister for Economic and Regional Development, as Minister responsible for the Act’s administration, is required to: • as soon as practicable after three years from the Act’s commencement, commence a review of the operation and effectiveness of the Act and prepare a report on that review; and • present the report to the House of Representatives as soon as practicable after its completion. 44. Consistent with the Terms of Refere nce, the scope of the statutory review includes an assessment of whether the licensing and permitting processes (within the Act and its regulations) are effectively and efficiently delivering on the purposes of the Act, and how they might be improved opera tionally. The statutory review of the Act is not intended to revisit first principles .
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 12 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 3.2. PROCESS 45. The consultation process ran from mid -August to the end of September 2021 and targeted those stakeholders directly affected by the OSHAA . Most submissions were received in written form, although verbal discussions with some stakeholders also took place. 46. Those targeted in the consultation process fell into four broad categories: • Agencies involved in administering the licensing and permitting processes – Over a dozen government agencies were included as part of this group, including relevant parts of MBIE, such as the Space Policy and Regulatory Systems (SPRS) and the Radio Spectrum Management team. • International regulatory agencies – MBIE emailed a targeted group of regulatory bodies in other jurisdictions to obtain their views on best practice in the regulation of the space and high -altitude sector and engage on matters relating to international obl igations. Agencies from Australia, Japan, Europe and the United States were included in this group. • Industry stakeholders who have applied, or will apply, for licences and permits – Regulated parties (past, present and prospective) were the largest sub -set of the targeted consultation group, with several dozen falling into this category. Many were existing permit holders, but some were prospective applicants . • Other stakeholders (eg universities and sector providers ). 3.3. RESPONSE 47. The Review Team receive d 17 written submissions and engaged in two stakeholder meetings which were treated as verbal submissions, with their agreement. Relevant extracts from Ministerial correspondence received during this period have also been treated as a submission s, as denot ed by an M in the list below. 48. Written submissions were received from the following parties: • Aotearoa/New Zealand Peace Foundation (International Affairs and Disarmament Committee) M • Care Weather • Civil Aviation Authority* • Government Communications and Se curity Bureau and New Zealand Security Intelligence Service – joint submission * • Jan Marsh M • Land Information New Zealand • Ministry of Defence* • Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade* • New Zealand Defence Force* • New Zealand Nuclear Free Peacemakers and Space f or Peace Aotearoa M • New Zealand Police • New Zealand Security Intelligence Service* • Orbital Astronautics • Robert Howell M • Rocket Lab • Space Operations New Zealand • Space Policy and Regulatory Systems team ( within MBIE)* Note: Submitters marked with an asterisk (*) are those who were given, and provided substantive input into, the information framework which the Review Team engaged the cross -agency group
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 13 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 on. The framework outlined questions and prompts for input to draw ou t insights and evidence from these agencies which they may hold from their experience as an agency with a role in the system. 49. During the consultation period, the Review Team met separately with Kea Aerospace , LeoLabs , and with the F AA as a co -regulator. As relevant to the subjects covered in the report, the insights and perspectives from these discussions are reflected in the body of this report, in a similar manner to feedback received via the submissions process. 50. The Review Team als o commissioned Professor Steven Freeland, an international law expert , to provide insights on the regulation of high -altitude activities internationally.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 14 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 PART TWO: KEY FINDINGS 1. OVERALL VIEW OF THE REGIME 51. New Zealand’s regime for the regulation of space and high -altitude activities has performed well. There have been no material safety or security issues, and decisions have been compliant with New Zealand’s international obligations, and national security and national interests. 52. The submissions indicate that the regime is well regarded by those entities that engaged with it, and this is illustrated by some quotes:
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 15 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 PART THREE: SUBSTANTIVE MATTERS 1) DEFINITION OF LAUNCH FACILITY STATUS QUO 55. Section 3 8 of the Act provides a person must not operate a laun ch facility in New Zealand unless the person has a facility licence for the launch facility . The term ‘launch facility’ is defined to mean, subject to any regulations made under section 88(1)(12), — a) means a facility (whether fixed or mobile) or place from which it is intended to launch a launch vehicle; and b) includes all other facilities that are necessary to launch a launch vehicle from the facility or place. 56. This is potentially a very broad definition which extends not just to the launch range and mis sion control but also testing facilities and ground stations. ISSUE 57. Space Op erations New Zealand (Space Ops) has expressed concern about the definition on the basis that it could be interpreted as meaning that they are required to hold a licence in relation to their operation of ground stations. ANALYSIS 58. We agree with Space Ops that the definition is too broad and should be amended to specifically exclud e ground stations which were not intended to be caught by the definition. If ground stations are to be regulated, they need to be regulated separately from launch facilities since the operator of a ground station is generally a different person than the op erator of a launch facility. 59. The issue is broader than just the inclusion of ground stations within the definition. The second limb of the definition that includes ‘all other facilities that are necessary to launch a launch vehicle from the facility or pla ce’ extends the definition beyond what is necessary to ensure launch facilities are properly regulated. Accordingly, we propose that the definition be amended so that it applies only to what is often described as the ‘launch range ’. A possible approach tha t has been suggested is t o repeal the second limb of the definition and add this into the first limb which captures the facility ‘from which it is intended to launch a launch vehicle‘ and includes any other relevant installation or equipment necessary for the operation of the facility. RECOMMENDATION 60. The Review recommends t hat the definition of ‘launch facility’ should be amended to remove the reference to ground stations. 2) ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES FOR REGULATING LAUNCH FACILITIES STATUS QUO 61. The Act requir es that the Minister may grant a facility licence only if the Minister is satisfied that — a) the applicant is technically capable of operating a launch facility safely; and b) the applicant has taken, and will continue to take, all reasonable steps to manage ris ks to public safety ; and
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 16 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 c) the proposed operation of the launch facility is consistent with New Zealand’s international obligations; and d) the applicant and the proposed operation of the launch facility meet any other prescribed requirements relating to the launch facility. ISSUE 62. The SPRS team has suggested it might be desirable to clarify the respective roles and responsibilities of MBIE and Work Safe on the face of the legislation. ANALYSIS 63. On the issue of the roles and responsibilities of MBIE and WorkSafe , we consider there is no need for the OSHAA to specifically regulate any of the facilities referred to in the definition for safety because they are already regulated under the Health and Safety at Work Act 2015. 64. There are two options for clarifying the ro les and responsibilities of the respective agencies. The first option is to repeal the technical capability and safety requirements in clause 40 of the Act, leaving the regulation of launch facilities to be dealt with entirely under the Health and Safety at Work Act 2015. 65. The alternative option would be to repeal the technical capability and safety requirements in clause 40 and include a provision , such as that provided in section 29A of the Crown Minerals Act , that requires the Minister to seek the views of the health and safety regulator (WorkSafe) on whether the prospective licensee has the capability and systems required to meet the requirements under the Health and Safety at Work Act 2015 before granting a facility licence. 66. On balance, we prefer the la tter approach because a simple repeal of the provision might be seen as a dilution of the emphasis on public safety. A requirement for the Minister to seek the views of WorkSafe on facility safety would also provide an additional check in the system which is appropriate for what is still a novel activity. This would have some resource implications for WorkSafe. However, the number of licence applications is likely to be very small and the SPRS team already asks WorkSafe to review the launch facility aspects of Rocket Lab’s safety case , so we would not expect this to be significant. RECOMMENDATION 67. The Review recommends that consideration be given to : • repealing the requiremen t in clause 40(1) of the Act that, before granting a facil ity licence , the Minister must (a) be satisfied that the applicant is technically capable of operating a launch facility safely , and (b) that the applicant has taken, and will continue to take, all reasonable steps to manage risks to public safety . • creatin g a new provision such as that provided in section 29A of the Crown Minerals Act , and that should be introduced, requiring the Minister to seek the views of the health and safety regulator (WorkSafe) on whether the prospective licensee has the capability a nd systems required to meet the requirements under the Health and Safety at Work Act 2015 before granting a facility licence. 3) LAUNCH LICENCES – MANAGING LAUNCH SAFETY STATUS QUO 68. Currently , launch safety is managed through a threshold test in section 9 of t he Act that requires the Minister to be satisfied that the applicant has taken, and will continue to take, all reasonable
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 17 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 steps to manage risks to public safety supported by requirements in the regulations for a safety case. ISSUE 69. A key issue is whether this is the optimal approach to managing launch safety or whether it would be better managed through performance -based safety regulations such as the FAA Commercial Space Transportation Regulations. A related issue is whether the current requiremen ts for a safety case are sufficiently specific about the types of safety systems that are required and , more generally , whether there needs to be more clarity about the safety standards against which a licence application will be assessed. ANALYSIS 70. Perform ance -based regulation started to be adopted as more common regulatory approach in the 1980s. It was a reaction to the cost and innovation -inhibiting effect of the extant prescriptive approaches. The objective of performance -based systems is to provide cert ainty through prescribed safety standards , but also flexibility by allowing alternative means of compliance. The Building Act 2004 is an example of this form of regulation. 71. The requirement for safety cases as a means of regulation was also a reaction to ex tant prescriptive regulation, but in this case the defined problem was that operators focused on compliance rather than safety. The primary objective of the safety case approach was to shift responsibility for safety from the government (as the rule maker) to the operator. Flexibility was a secondary objective. 72. In practice, our current safety case approach has not been tested because the Minister is able to treat Rocket Lab’s FAA launch licence as satisfying the safety and technical capability requirements , rather than relying on its safety case. However, we need to ensure that the legislative framework is sufficiently robust to manage safety appropriately if an application by a non-US applicant was made. 73. An advantage of the safety case approach is that it provides maximum flexibility and as a result readily accommodates changes in technology , therefore support ing innovation. However, it does not provide certainty to operators as to the safety standards that need to be applied or how licence applications will be assessed. 74. The FAA has had a great deal of experience in regulating the safety of commercial space activities and it has recently amended its regulations to move it to a more performance -based model , which mitigates earlier concerns that the regula tions were too rigid to allow for innovation. 75. There would be several advantages in moving to a performance -based model based on the US regulations. As both the US and New Zealand regulate Rocket Lab’s activities, there are significant advantages in the two systems being interoperable. 76. The US has a proven track record in regulating space launches and the requirements in the regulations are set to achieve a high standard of safety. However, the regulations also allow for alternative approaches to those provid ed for in the regulations, provided they achieve an equivalent level of safety. 77. As a result, the regulations provide certainty to both regulators and regulated parties about the safety standards that are required whilst provi ding flexibility to allow for i nnovation. 78. There is also an increasing interest in space launch activities internationally and there is an advantage in having safety regulations that are interoperable. There is a limited pool of people internationally who have the expertise to assess lau nch licence applications, a problem which would be compounded if there are a multiplicity of different approaches to safety regulation.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 18 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 79. It seems likely that other jurisdictions that are establishing space regulatory systems will look to the US system as an exemplar of safety regulation given its experience in regulating launch safety. 80. Even if other jurisdictions do not look to the US safety standards and the full advantages of interoperability are not realised, a performance -based approach seems more approp riate than our current open -ended safety case approach because of the clarity and certainty it provides about the safety standards that are required. This seems important in a field of endeavour that is characterised by rapid technological change, and whic h is therefore inherently risky. 81. However, if the current safety case approach is to be retained, consideration needs to be given to whether the existing requirements are sufficiently specific to appropriately manage safety or whether a greater level of prescription is required, particularly as to the general nature of the safety analysis that is required. 82. The regulations require identification of safety critical systems, the safety standards applied, safety management systems and an emergency management pla n but do not prescribe the type of safety analysis that is required. This contrasts with the new UK Space Industry Regulations 2021 which contain much more detai led requirements for a safety case, including detailed requirements for flight safety analysis and ground safety analysis. 83. The Australian regulations do not specifically require a safety case but are also much more specific than the New Zealand regulations about the information required for a launch licence and the type of safety analysis that is re quired. RECOMMENDATION 84. The Review recommends that MBIE carry out a review of the safety requirements for launch licen sing to assess whether more detailed safety regulation is required, whether through performance -based safety regulation or more detailed re quirements about the contents of a safety case. At the same time, the Review Team is aware that MBIE is consider ing what is necessary to build its own capability so that it is in a position to appropriately regulate domestic launches in circumstances where recognition of an overseas licence is not possible. 4) LAUNCH LICENCES – THE MANAGEMENT OF ORBITAL DEBRIS STATUS QUO 85. Section 9(1)(c) of the Act establishes , as a threshold test for a launch licence , that the applicant has an orbital debris mitigation plan th at meets any prescribed requirements. Section 17(c) of the Act establishes a similar requirement for payload permits. Regulation 13 of the Outer Space and High -altitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulations 2017 specifies the requirements for an orbital debris mitigation plan (ODMP) . ISSUE 86. MBIE’s consideration of Rocket Lab’s imminent C APSTONE mission to lunar orbit has identified that, in addition to the management of debris in Earth orbit , there is also a need to manage non - Earth space debris and to provide for planetary protection. There is currently discussion about whether and what changes need to be made to the regulations to take account of the fact that New Zealand’s space activities now extend beyond activities in Earth orbit and now into lunar orbit. 87. Leaving aside the need to regulate space debris, Rocket Lab has submitted that the current orbital debris mitigation requirements in the regulations do not provide operators with sufficient certainty because they do not specify the standard or standards that need to be adhered to. The issue here is whether there needs to be an amendment to the regulations .
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 19 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 ANALYSIS 88. If space exploration takes place beyond Earth orbit, there is a potential for space debris that is non-Earth orbit ing. This is particularly likely to arise in the context of the post -mission disposal of the launch vehicle , where this takes place beyond Earth orbit. 89. Planetary protection is the practice of protecting solar system bodies from contamination by Earth life and pr otecting Earth from possible life forms that may be returned from other solar system bodies. N ASA’s planetary protection polic ies and requirements provide a useful model for ensuring the protection of the Earth, the Moon and other celestial bodies. The Com mittee on Space Research (COSPAR) guideline s, which are similar , also provide a useful model. 90. Article 9 of the Outer Space Treaty requires states parties to conduct exploration of outer space, the Moon, and other celestial bodies so as to avoid their harmf ul contamination and adverse changes in the environment of the Earth resulting from the introduction of extra -terrestrial matter and, where necessary, shall adopt appropriate measures for this purpose. 91. In the short term it has been possible to manage the permitting of Rocket Lab’s proposed CAPSTONE mission by developing a policy on post -mission disposal in the lunar orbit. In the longer term , it is desirable to develop regulations to manage space debris beyond Earth orbit and implement requirements for pla netary protection. 92. On the existing regulations, we note that the regulations are based on the requirements for orbital debris mitigation developed by the Inter -Agency Space Debris Co -ordination Committee (IADC). The regulations specify the outcomes that ar e required for an ODMP, rather than specifying a particular means of achieving those outcomes. This gives operators flexibility about the standards they apply for managing orbital debris, providing they achieve the necessary outcomes. We would be reluctant to prescribe standards that the operator must adhere to since this would reduce flexibility and potentially inhibit innovation. MBIE provides information on its website about the standards that will meet the orbital debris requirements which helps provide certainty for operators. RECOMMENDATION 93. The Review recommends: • That the Act be amended to include a new threshold requirement that would apply if an applicant for a licence intends to conduct space exploration beyond Earth orbit. The new provision would require the Minister to be satisfied that non -Earth orbit ing space debris and planetary protection are appropriately managed, in accordance with prescribed requirements (if any). In addition, there should be a new power to make regulations prescribing requirements relating to the management of non -Earth orbit ing space debris and planetary protection. • That MBIE’s SPRS team considers publishing on its website a list of the international standards that provide an acceptable means of compliance with the regulations relating to the management of orbital debris. 5) RELATIONS HIP BETWEEN LAUNCH LICENCES AND HIGH -ALTITUDE LICENCES STATUS QUO 94. There is currently no definition of ‘outer space’ in the Act . There is a definition of high -altitude. 95. High -altitude means an altitude above the higher of: (a) flight level 600; and
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 2 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 TABLE OF CONTENTS PART ONE: INTRODUCTION ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 5 1. Rationale for regulating space activities ................................ ................................ ................ 5 1.1. Establishing the case for intervention ................................ ................................ ........................ 5 1.2. Extending the scope to high -altitude vehicles ................................ ................................ ........... 5 2. Key features of regulatory regime ................................ ................................ ......................... 6 2.1. System objectives ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................... 6 2.2. Key elements of the regime ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 6 Licensing and permitting ................................ ................................ ................................ ............ 6 Reco gnition of international authorisations ................................ ................................ .............. 7 Regulation making powers ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 7 Operational policies and guidance material ................................ ................................ .............. 8 2.3. Key facts and figures on implementation ................................ ................................ .................. 8 Applications for licences and permits ................................ ................................ ........................ 8 Declining an application or imposing conditions ................................ ................................ ....... 9 Varying, suspending or revoking permits and licences ................................ .............................. 9 Statutory powers ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................... 10 Non -statutor y practices to support compliance ................................ ................................ ...... 10 3. Approach to the review ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 11 3.1. Scope ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 11 3.2. Process ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 12 3.3. Response ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 12 PART TWO: KEY FINDINGS ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 14 1. Overall view of the regime ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 14 PART THREE: SUBSTANTIVE MATTERS ................................ ................................ .................. 15 1) Definition of launch facility ................................ ................................ ................................ . 15 Status Quo ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................... 15 Issue ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................. 15 Analysis ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 15 Recommendation ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 15 2) Roles and responsibilities for regulating launch facilities ................................ ...................... 15 Status Quo ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................... 15 Issue ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................. 16 Analysis ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 16 Recommendation ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 16 3) Launch licences – managing launch safety ................................ ................................ ........... 16 Status Quo ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................... 16 Issue ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................. 17 Analysis ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 17 Recommendation ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 18 4) Launch licences – the management of orbital debris ................................ ............................ 18 Status Quo ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................... 18 Issue ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................. 18 Analysis ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 19
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 20 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 (b) the highest upper limit of controlled airspace under the Civil Aviation Act 1990. 96. Accordingly, the Act provides for the lower limit of high -altitude but does not provide an upper limit. ISSUE 97. Professor Steven Freeland4 , an international space law expert, has raised an issue about whether the relationship between launch licences and high -altitude licences is sufficiently clear. The submissions from Kea Aerospace and the SPRS team also raise issues about the lack of clarity about the boundary between launch licences and high -altitude licences. 98. The key concern is that there should be clarity and certainty about when launch licences, high - altitude licences and payload permits are required. ANALYSIS 99. At the time the legislation was developed there was a delibera te decision not to define the term ‘outer space’ or to set the upper limit of ‘high -altitude’ because there is no international consensus about where airspace ends and space begins. 100. The issue is significant because the legal regimes that govern space and outer space are very different - states have jurisdiction over their airspace, no state has jurisdiction over space and different liability rules apply. 101. Over the last three years the absence of a definition of outer space or of a defined upper limit of high-altitude has not caused any difficulties in practice. Rocket Lab has been the only applicant for a launch licence and there have been two applications for high -altitude licences , one relating to an experimental rocket, the other to a high -altitude balloo n. In each case , the applicant knew without being told what type of licence was required. 102. However, as new technologies develop and high -altitude vehicles reach higher and higher altitudes , the issue of whether the operator should apply for a launch licence , or a high -altitude licence may become more acute . This is because in the absence of any definition of where airspace ends and outer space begins, at very hig h altitude it may not be clear if a particular activity is a space activity or a high -altitude ac tivity. 103. There are two options for introducing greater certainty about whether a particular activity requires a launch licence or a high -altitude licence.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 21 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 return of a space object require s a licence. There is a separ ate requirement for the launch of high - powered rockets below this level. 106. When the spatial limit was introduced in 2002 (as an amendment to the current Act’s predecessor , the Space Activities Act 1998), the Australian government emphasised that the purpose of the amendment was to provide certainty to industry about when the provisions of the legislation applied, given there is no definitive explanation of the term in either Australian or international law. In other words, the legislation did not purport to d ecide where airspace begins and outer space ends , and the spatial limit is simply a mechanism to provide certainty to industry . Denmark 107. The 2016 Outer Space Act defines the term ‘outer space ’ as meaning: space above the altitude of 100km above sea level. 108. Like Australia, the Danish Government has acknowledged that there is no internationally agreed definition of ‘outer space’ and that the purpose of the definition is ‘to clarify the scope of the Act to launches or attempted launches up to a clearly d efined point a nd, thus, to provide certainty to industry ’. The definition does not in any way prejudge a Danish position about the definition of the term ‘outer space’ according to international law. United Arab Emirates (UAE) 109. Federal Law no . (12) of 2019 on The Regulation of the Space Sector introduced a high -altitude regime. It defines the upper limit of high -altitude as any area above an altitude of 80 kilometres or more. 110. Very few other jurisdictions include a spatial limit in their space laws to delimit where airspace ends and space begins , although we are advised by Professor Steven Freeland that several other jurisdictions are currently considering it. OPTION 2 111. The alternative option is to define the activities that constitute ‘launch activ ities’ and to exclude ‘launch activities ’ from the ‘high -altitude’ definition. This is similar to the approach taken in the UK legislation - the Space Industry Act 2018. The Act distinguishes between ‘space activities’ and ‘suborbital launches’ . Space acti vities are activities that involve going into Earth orbit and beyond. Suborbital activities involve the operation and return of craft capable of operating above the stratosphere , or balloons that can reach the stratosphere carrying crew or passengers. 112. Whil e the definition of suborbital flights under the UK legislation is quite different from New Zealand’s hig h-altitude definition (and relates only to activities above the stratosphere), we are attracted to defining the licen sing requirements by reference to the distinction between activities that go into orbit and beyond , and suborbital activities (which would , under New Zealand law , be defined as to include vehicles capable of or intended to go above controlled airspace). 113. This is because a test based on the distinction between launches where the launch vehicle or part of it goes into Earth orbit and beyond sits much more neatly than a spatial limit with the threshold tests under our legislation. 114. The threshold tests that apply to launch licences and high -altitude vehicles are largely the same – they are concerned with safety, consistency with international obligations and managing national interests. 115. The key difference between launch licences and high -altitude licences is that a launch licence application is re quired to meet an additional threshold test relating to the management of orbital debris.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 22 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 116. That being the case , it makes sense to have a definition of ‘launch activities’ that encompasses those activities that could create orbital debris (or more broadly space debris) as we discuss later in the report. 117. If a spatial limit was adopted, an applicant might be required to meet orbital debris requirements in circumstances where no orbital debris could, or would, be created. 118. We acknowledge that some sounding rock ets, such as the German Aerospace Center’s ( DLR) MORABA rocket and NASA’s Oriole IV do go to extremely high -altitude and that certain vehicle s with ballistic profiles reach such heights that they could pose a safety risk to space object s. However, we consi der this is best managed through the safety risk assessment for high -altitude vehicles , rather than being managed by an arbitrary spatial limit. 119. Finally, we note the possibility of ‘hybrid’ vehicles that are intended to go into both space and high -altitude . In these circumstances it would be appropriate for a launch licence rather than a high -altitude licence to be obtained. As the only difference in licen sing requirements would be that a launch licence requires orbital (and other space) debris to be managed while a high -altitude licence does not, it would be unnecessary to require an operator to obtain two licences. RECOMMENDATION 120. The Review recommends that consideration be given to including in the legislation a new definition of ‘launch activity’. A launch licence would be required if a person was seeking to carry out a ‘launch activity’. The definition of ‘launch activity’ would relate to an activity wher e a launch vehicle, or any part of the launch vehicle, is intended to go into Earth orbit or beyond Earth orbit. If that approach was taken, a consequential change could be made to the ‘payload’ definition to replace the reference to ‘an object intended to go into space’ with a reference to ‘an object intended to go into Earth orbit and beyond’. 6) HIGH -ALTITUDE REGIME – MANAGING THE SAFETY OF HIGH -ALTITUDE ACTIVITIES STATUS QUO 121. The high -altitude regime distinguishes between high -altitude vehicles that are aircraft and those that are not when it comes to managing the technical competence of operators and the safety of the high -altitude vehicles. 122. In relation to high -altitude licences that are not aircraft , the Minister needs to be satisfied that the applicant h as the technical capability to conduct a safe launch and the applicant has taken, and will continue to take, all reasonable steps to manage risks to public safety. 123. To satisfy these requirements, The Regulations require the applicant to submit a safety case . This aligns with the approach to launch licences. 124. In the case of high -altitude vehicles that are aircraft, the Minister requires confirmation from the Director of Civil Aviation that the aircraft or (where relevant) the operator of the aircraft has the appropriate permits, certificates , or other documents required under the Civil Aviation Act 1990 (if any) or in the case of a foreign aircraft, that the aircraft is recognised under New Zealand law . The Minister must also take into account any advice or inf ormation provided by the Director of Civil Aviation in relation to the safety of the operation of the aircraft at high -altitude. ISSUE 125. A key issue is whether the current approach to safety regulation of HAVs is appropriate. Does it make sense for the Minister to rely on the Civil Aviation Act 1990 to manage the safety of HAVs
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 23 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 that are aircraft ? Is the safety case approach appropriate for managing the safety issues associated with HAVs that are not aircraft or would performance -based safety regulation be more appropriate? Related questions include whether the requirements applicable to rockets in part 101 of the Civil Aviation Rules are suf ficient for dealing with high powered rockets and how to deal with ‘hybrid’ vehicles. For example, Dawn Aerospace’s space plane is currently regulated as an aircraft but in many respects operates more like a rocket. 126. MBIE’s SPR S team has also raised a separ ate but related issue about whether there should be a separate licence class for high powered rockets even if they do not reach high -altitude, noting that the Act does not currently regulate Missile Technology Control Regime ( MTCR ) category one rockets tha t are not launched to an altitude at or above flight level 600. The SPR S team considers there is a question of whether the applicable CAA Rule (101) is appropriate for managing public safety in this area because its concern is with the safety of aircraft a nd high -powered rockets are not aircraft. ANALYSIS 127. The distinction between high -altitude vehicles that are aircraft and those that are not is sens ible because aircraft are subject to a comprehensive safety regime under the Civil Aviation Act 1990. The te rm ‘aircraft ’ means any machine that can derive support in the atmosphere from the reactions of the air otherwise than by the reactions of the air against the surface of the Earth. The civil aviation regime is designed to manage the technical competence of operators (w here appropriate) and the safety of aircraft. 128. The C AA has the expertise in regulating aircraft safety and it would add an unnecessary cost and compliance burden if there was an additional layer of safety regulation for aircraft merely because they are int ended to, or are capable of, going into high altitude. 129. A potential complication is that at very high altitude an aircraft may cease to be an aircraft. An example would be a spaceplane that is deriving atmospheric lift during ascent, then continuing a ballistic trajectory to an apogee followed by a descent that is initially ballistic but derives atmospheric lift for flight at lower altitude. However, we anticipate that in these circumstances the CAA would continue to be the safety regulator since it would m ake no sense for a different regulator to regulate safety for a small part of a vehicle ’s journey. 130. The Act contemplates that the CAA will provide the Minister with advice on whether there are additional safety risks from operating at high altitude. In our view this is sufficient to appropriately manage the safety risks associated with unmanned high -altitude vehicles because the safety risks at high altitude are not so different from the safety risks at lower levels as to require a separate and additional la yer of regulation. 131. However, while the distinction between HAVs that are aircraft and those that are not remains appropriate to avoid the situation of having two different regulators regulating the same thing, there is a question about whether Parts 101 and 102 of the Civil Aviation Rules apply to, or are appropriate for, regulating all forms of high -altitude activity . The issue is particularly acute in the case of vehicles, such as Dawn Aerospace’s spaceplane, which is regulated as an aircraft , though in ma ny respects operates more like a rocket. While the timing of any review of Parts 101 and 102 of the Civil Aviation Rules is a matter for the CAA, we would support an early review being undertaken in conjunction with further work by MBIE on the regulation o f high -altitude vehicles. 132. A related question is whether the OSH AA deals appropriately with the safety of HAVs that are not aircraft. Part 101 of the Civil Aviation Rules does provide some limited regulation of rockets , but this is largely for the purpose o f ensuring the safety of aircraft. The CAA has acknowledged these rules are not appropriate for, and do not apply to , launch vehicles that are regulated by the OSH AA. A similar issue arises about whether they are appropriate for, or should apply to, high - powered high -altitude rockets which are also regulated by the OSHAA. We recommend that
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 24 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 MBIE’s SPRS team engage s with the CAA to discuss the appropriateness and applicability of Part 101 of the Civil Aviation Rules for managing high -powered high -altitude roc kets. We also recommend engagement with the CAA on how to regulate HAVs . 133. Currently the OSHAA requires a safety case for HAVs that are not aircraft. The question is whether performance -based safety regulation would provide better safety outcomes than the current safety case approach. This is the same question we have asked in relation to launch vehicles. Our tentative view is that it would because it provides clarit y about the safety standards that are required. Accordingly, we recommend that further work on this issue be undertaken in conjunction with a review of the safety requirements for launch licen sing. 134. Whatever form of regulation is required, it will be import ant to consider the scope of the safety analysis that is required. Generally, the safety analysis will need to cover public safety on the ground and in the air. In the case of vehicles that go into very high altitude, particularly those with a ballistic pr ofile, the safety of space objects will also need to be considered. In each case, the safety analysis will need to be proportionate to the risks associated with the activity. 135. On the issue raised by the SPRS team about the need for a new licence type to reg ulate high - powered rockets that are not capable of or intended to reach high -altitude , we have several reservations. We are not aware of any issues that have arisen with rockets that operate in altitudes of lower than flight level 600 and the regulation of rockets at these much lower altitudes seem a long way removed from a space law. 136. We note that Australia (which does not have a high -altitude regime) has recently adopted a licen sing requirement for high -powered rockets. The definition of a ‘high -powered ro cket’ is contained in rules and does not depend upon the altitude the rocket is capable of achieving. 137. The definition in rule 5 of the Australian rules specifies two elements for an object to be a high - power rocket. An object is a high -power rocket if it m eets either paragraph 5(a) or 5(b). Paragraph 5(a) provides that rockets which have a large combined total impulse (greater than 889,600 Newton seconds) are captured as high -power rockets. Paragraph 5(b) ensures that rockets which have a lower combined tot al impulse (but still greater than 40,960 Newton seconds) than in paragraph 5(a) but include systems that allow active control of the rocket’s trajectory, are captured as a high -power rocket. 138. We are confident, however, that a high -powered rocket that met t he Australian definition would be capable of going into high altitude. On that basis we do not consider adopting the Australian approach would result in a different outcome than the New Zealand approach. Accordingly, the Review does not recommend any new l icence type for rockets that are not capable of or intended to go into high altitude. 139. Finally, an issue has been raised whether the current rules are adequate if an operator was proposing to undertake manned high -altitude space flight. In our view , they ar e not. However, as there is currently no prospect of manned spaceflight on the horizon, we have not explored that matter any further. RECOMMENDATION 140. The Review recommends: • That MBIE engage s with the CAA to discuss the applicability, and appropriateness of Part 101 of the Civil Aviation Rules, for high -powered rockets and more generally for HAVs; and • That further consideration of whether performance -based regulation of the safety of non - aircraft HAVs be undertaken in conjunction with a review of the safety requirements for launch licen sing.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 25 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 141. The Review does not recommend the creation of a new licence for high -powered rockets that are incapable of going beyond flight level 600. 7) PAYLOAD PERMITS AND HIGH -ALTITUDE PAYLOADS STATUS QUO 142. Section 15 of the Act requires a person who launches or procures the launch of a payload to have a payload permit if that payload is launched: a) from a launch facility in New Zealand ; or b) from a launch vehicle that was launched from a launch facility in New Zealand or a vehicle i n the air that was launched from New Zealand. 143. The term ‘payload‘, subject to any regulations made under section 88(1) (11): a) means an object that is carried or placed, or is intended to be carried or placed, in outer space; and b) includes components of a launch vehicle that are specifically designed or adapted for the object (but does not otherwise include a launch vehicle or any of its component parts) ; and c) includes a load to be caried for testing purposes or otherwise on a non -profit basis. 144. Accordingly, persons who procure the launch of payloads (eg satellites or other space objects) are required to have a payload permit, whether that payload is launched from a launch services provider such as Rocket Lab or from a high -altitude vehicle. 145. The Act also conta ins a definition of ‘high -altitude payload’. 146. A high -altitude payload, subject to any regulations made under section 88(1) (13): a) means an object that is carried or placed, or is intended to be carried or placed, at high - altitude; and b) includes components o f a high -altitude vehicle that are specifically designed or adapted for the object (but does not otherwise include a high -altitude vehicle or any of its component parts) ; and c) includes a load to be caried for testing purposes or otherwise on a non -profit ba sis.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 26 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 151. Dawn Aerospace, for example, noted that the current definition of high -altitude payload is problematic and confusi ng in their operational context and Kea Aerospace drew attention to the fact that the term ‘payload’ is used differently in the civil aviation and space contexts. In our discussions with the CAA, they also drew attention to the differences in terminology i n the civil aviation and space contexts. ANALYSIS 152. At the time the legislation was developed, the high -altitude vehicles that were in contemplation were high -altitude balloons, such as those operated by NASA for research purposes. It seemed unnecessary at the time to consider the payload of a vehicle separately from the high -altitude vehicle itself , because it was assumed that the owner and operator of the payload would be one and the same. 153. New technologies, such as the spaceplanes being developed by Dawn Aerospace and Kea, change that position because they open up the very real prospect of scientific and other activities being commissioned by someone other than the person who operates the vehicle. In such a case, the payload or equipment used to carry out the activity might be owned by either the operator of the high -altitude vehicle or by the person who is conducting the scientific research. 154. There is a clear rationale for requiring separate licences and permits for launch vehicles and payload s in the space context because a launch vehicle and its payload are separate and distinct space objects that need to be separately managed from the perspective of safety, management of orbital debris and protecting the national interest. 155. This distinction holds good whe never a payload is placed into orbit, whether by a launch vehicle or by a high -altitude vehicle, and in each case the legislation requires a payload permit under section 15 because the same interests are at play . These interests are the management of the collision risk in space, the management of orbital debris, and ensuring the activity is consistent with international obligations and not contrary to the national interest . 156. The position is much less clear cut in the case of high -altitude vehicles and the ac tivities they perform at high -altitude. Safety issues relating to high -altitude vehicles are likely to be managed through licen sing of the vehicle and the issue of orbital debris does not arise. There may not need to be a separate permit to manage the saf ety of its payload in the case of a high -altitude vehicle because the payload is unlikely to operate independently of the high -altitude vehicle. For example, a sensor for remote sensing is likely to be attached to the vehicle and the safety of the activity is likely to be assessed as part of the vehicle licen sing requirement. However, further work is required to assess whether that will always be the case and to fully understand the impact of carrying various types of scientific equipment on vehicle safety . 157. It will always be necessary for activities carried out by a high -altitude vehicle to be consistent with our international obligations and not contrary to the national interest. These interests are as relevant to high -altitude activities as they are to lau nch activities. 158. Accordingly, we agree that in circumstances where the operator of the vehicle may not necessarily be the person that carries out the activity, there will almost certainly be a need for a permit that is separate from the vehicle licence to p roperly regulate the activity performed by the vehicle and ensure it is not contrary to the national interest. 159. However, in our view, a question that needs to be asked is exactly what it is that needs to be permitted. Is it the activity that the vehicle i s carrying out or is it the payload it is carrying ? Do the differences in context necessitate a difference in approach from the way in which launches and payload s are regulated? 160. Arguably, in the high -altitude context, it is more appropriate to regulate the activity carried out by a high -altitude vehicle rather than its payload because the payload (or equipment used to
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 27 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 carry out the activity) could be owned and operated by either t he operator of the high -altitude vehicle who hires it out for commercial gain or by the person who has commissioned the high - altitude activity. If the concern is about the nature of the activity and who is carrying it out, then regulating the activity rath er than the payload seems more appropriate. Against that, th e capability of the payload may in and of itself give rise to national interest concerns. 161. In our view the question of how to regulate the new and emerging high -altitude technologies raises some s ignificant issues that we are only able to touch on very briefly in the context of this review. Further work is necessary to get a better understanding of how the business models of the proposed operators will work, the nature of the payload s they are like ly to carry and how the payload might impact on questions of vehicle safety. We recommend that further work on these issue s be undertaken as soon as is practicable given that development of the technology is reasonably well advanced. 162. The issue of the exist ing definition of ‘high -altitude payload’ is of limited importance when looked at in the context of the much bigger issues surrounding the regulation of high -altitude activities. As the term is used in the legislation, it has very little operative effect. The term is used in the definition of ‘technical data’, in the enforcement provisions (which have never been used) and in the regulation -making powers (with no regulations having been made). While the definition will need to be looked at in the context of the further work on high -altitude vehicles, we do not see any need for urgent amendment. RECOMMENDATION 163. The Review recommend s that further work be undertaken on how best to regu late new and emerging high -altitude activities. 8) HIGH -ALTITUDE REGIME – THE SCOPE OF THE EXEMPTION REGIME STATUS QUO 164. The Outer Space and High -altitude Activities (Definition of High -altitude Vehicle) Regulations 2017 regime excludes certain types of balloons from the high -altitude regime. These include certain types of weathe r balloon, balloons launched for educational purposes under the supervision of schools and universities , and balloons of a type readily available in retail stores in New Zealand if they are used solely for the purpose of describing or illustrating the prog ress of the balloon. ISSUE 165. Dawn Aerospace submits that a broader category of balloons should be exempt from the regime. It notes that the Civil Aviation Rules distinguish between ‘medium free balloons ‘ and ’heavy free balloons ’. It considers medium weight balloons should be exempt from the high -altitude regime. In the Civil Aviation Rules t he term ‘med ium free balloon ’ means a free balloon, that : (1) carries a payload of 2 or more payload packages with a combined mass of — i. more than 4 kg; and ii. less than 6 kg; and (2) does not meet any of the criteria specified in the definition of the term heavy free balloon.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 28 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 ANALYSIS 166. The current exemptions in the Outer Space and High -altitude Activities (Definition of High - altitude Vehicle) Regulations 2017 exclude from the regime balloons of a type that are unlike to pose risks to national security or other national interests. 167. We have consulted relevant agencies who agree that medium weight balloons as defined in the Civil Aviation Rules are unlikely to give rise to any significant national interest concerns . This weight class has a limited utility for operations that could raise any issues that are sufficiently serio us to warrant regulation. T he limits imposed by weight affects complexity of activities, and the types of activity it can undertake , and duration of the operations of balloons of this type. On that basis, we agree that medium weight balloons can be exclude d from the high-altitude regime. 168. On that basis, we consider that medium free balloons should be excluded from the high-altitude regime. RECOMMENDATION 169. The Review recommend s considering the case for amending the Outer Space and High -altitude Activities (De finition of High -altitude Vehicle) Regulations 2017 to exclude certain high -altitude vehicles, including medium free balloons and small rockets . 9) HIGH -ALTITUDE REGIME – ESTABLISHMENT OF A REGISTRATION SYSTEM STATUS QUO 170. The Registration Convention requires t hat when a space object is launched into Earth orbit and beyond the launching state is required to enter the object on a domestic register and to provide certain information about the object to the Secretary General of the United Nations as soon as reasonably practicable. 171. MBIE has established a domestic space register and regularly provides information from the register to the Secretary of the United Nations as required by the Registration Convention. ISSUE 172. There is no comparable registration requir ement for high -altitude vehicles. 173. Professor Steven Freeland has suggested that there may nonetheless be utility in establishing a register of high -altitude launches for domestic use. ANALYSIS 174. We agree. While there is no obligation to create a register or to furnish information to the UN, a register is likely to provide a quick and easy way to respond to requests for information about high -altitude launches. The establishment of a register is not onerous and does not require legislation. RECOMMENDATION 175. The Review recommend s the SPRS team establish a register of high -altitude vehicles.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 29 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 10) THE NEED TO REGULATE THE RETURN OF SPACE OBJECTS AND HIGH - ALTITUDE VEHICLES STATUS QUO 176. The OSHAA doesn’t currently distinguish between the launch and return of launch vehicles and high -altitude vehicles. If the launch vehicles and high -altitude vehicles, or any part of them, return to Earth this is simply treated as an aspect of the launch l icensing or high -altitude licen sing process. 177. Under Australian law , a separate authorisation is required for the return of a space object . ISSUE 178. Professor Steven Freeland suggests that consideration should be given to the need for a separate authorisation f or the return of both space objects and high -altitude vehicles. ANALYSIS 179. We do not consider there is a need for a separate authorisation for the return of a space object or a high -altitude vehicle where the person who launches the space object or high -altitude vehicle also returns the object or vehicle , since the issues relating to both launch and return can be appropriately dealt with in the same licen sing process. 180. However, there may be a case for requiring a separate authorisation for a return of a space object or high -altitude vehicle if the launcher of the vehicle does not need a launch or high -altitude licence. This will generally be the case if the launch vehicle or high -altitude vehicle is launched from a country other than New Zealand. 181. For example, in Australia, launch vehicles launched in another jurisdiction have been returned to the Australia n Outback . Theoretically , this could also occur with certain types of high -altitude vehicle s, such as a high -altitude balloon . 182. If a high -altitude vehicle launched overseas returned to New Zealand, a diplomatic clearance would be required which would give New Zealand a measure of control. However, in the case of the return of a launch vehicle, no diplomatic clearance is required, a nd the return would be entirely unregulated. 183. In both cases, the return could give rise to both safety and environmental issues , and so a requirement for prior authorisation may be appropriate. RECOMMENDATION 184. The review recommend s that consideration be give n to requiring a separate authorisation for the return of space objects and high -altitude vehicles. The requirement for a return authorisation would apply only if launch of the space object or high -altitude vehicle has not been licen sed in New Zealand. 11) SECTION 3 OF THE ACT - THE PURPOSE PROVISION STATUS QUO 185. Section 3 of the OSHAA sets out the purpose of the Act and provides: The purpose of this Act is to: a) facilitate the development of a space industry and provide for its safe and secure operation;
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 3 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 Recommendation ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 19 5) Relationshi p between Launch licences and High -Altitude Licences ................................ ....... 19 Status Quo ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................... 19 Issue ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................. 20 Analysis ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 20 Recommendation ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 22 6) High -Altitude regime – managing the safety of high -altitude activities ................................ . 22 Status Quo ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................... 22 Issue ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................. 22 Analysis ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 23 Recommendation ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 24 7) Payload permits and High -Altitude payloads ................................ ................................ ....... 25 Status Quo ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................... 25 Issue ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................. 25 Analysis ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 26 Recommendation ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 27 8) High -Altitude regime – the scope of the exemption regime ................................ .................. 27 Status Quo ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................... 27 Issue ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................. 27 Analysis ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 28 Recommendation ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 28 9) High -Altitude regime – Establishment of a Registration system ................................ ............ 28 Status Quo ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................... 28 Issue ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................. 28 Analysis ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 28 Recommendation ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 28 10) The need t o regulate the return of space objects and High -Altitude vehicles ........................ 29 Status Quo ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................... 29 Issue ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................. 29 Analysis ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 29 Recommendation ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 29 11) Section 3 of the Act - the purpose provision ................................ ................................ ......... 29 Status Quo ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................... 29 Issue ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................. 30 Analysis ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 30 Recommendation ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 30 12) Emerging technologies – future proofing the regime ................................ ............................ 30 Status Quo ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................... 30 Issues ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................ 31 Analysis ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 31 Recommendation ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 32 13) Remote sensing ................................ ................................ ................................ .................. 33 Status Quo ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................... 33 Issues ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................ 34 Analysis ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 34 Recommendations ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 35
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 30 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 b) implement certain international obligations of New Zealand relating to space activities and space technology; c) without limiting paragraph (b), implement the obliga tions in the Outer Space Treaty not to: i. place in orbit around the Earth any objects carrying nuclear weapons or weapons of mass destruction, install such weapons on celestial bodies, or station such weapons in outer space in any other manner ; ii. establish mil itary bases, installations, or fortifications on celestial bodies ; iii. test any type of weapons or conduct manoeuvres on celestial bodies; d) manage any potential or actual liability that may arise from the space industry; e) establish a system for the regulation of space activities and certain high -altitude activities; f) preserve New Zealand’s national security and national interests. ISSUE 186. Kea Aerospace submits that the legislation currently treats high -altitude activities as secondary to space activities and that there should be a reference to high -altitude activities in section 3(a) of the purpose provision in recognition of their equal importance. ANALYSIS 187. The Review team agrees that it would be appropriate to include a specific reference to high - altitude a ctivities in section 3(a) of the Act. Whilst Rocket Lab’s launch activities were the original catalyst for the legislation, the past three years has seen the emergence of new technologies such as Dawn Aerospace’s suborbital and orbital rocket -powered space plane which is under development , and Kea Aerospace’s solar -powered, remotely piloted aircraft which is also being developed. 188. While there is a reference to high -altitude in clause 3(e), which relates to the objective of establishing a system for appropri ately regulating these activities, there is no equivalent reference in section 3(a) , which prescribes as an objective facilitating the development of a space industry and providing for its safe and secure operation. The objective of facilitating the develo pment of a high -altitude industry and providing for its safe and secure operation is equally important as the development of a space industry and should be included in the purpose provision. RECOMMENDATION 189. The Review recommends that section 3(a) of the Act be amended to include the purpose of facilitating the development of a high -altitude industry and providing for its safe and secure operation. 12) EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES – FUTURE PROOFING THE REGIME STATUS QUO 190. The Act contains several regulations making powers that were designed to future -proof the regime. Regulation making powers are a useful and flexible mechanism for managing an emerging technology because they provide an option for regulating new technologie s when they are sufficiently developed, without necessarily requiring it unless and until there is a case for regulation.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 31 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 ISSUE S 191. Since the OSH AA was developed there have been several developments that pose challenges for regulating the space environment. To future -proof the regime, we consider it would be useful to include new regulation -making powers to allow for the regulation of new issues and technologies in the future. For example, submissions identified technologies such as beacons , propulsion , and active debris removal as potential subjects for regulation. 192. The SPRS team can, and does develop , operational policies to deal with new and emerging issues. For example, it is currently developing a policy on constellations. New and emerging issues can also be regulated through the imposition of conditions on licences and permits if there is a need for binding obligations to be imposed. However, if these activities become widespread, regulations are a much more certain and transparent means of regulating them . 193. Arguably , the existing regulation -making powers could permit the making of regulations to regulate these emerging technologies , since they allow for regulations to do anything that is necessary or desirable to protect public safety, protect the environment, preserve national security and avoid interference with space or terrestrial telecommunicati ons. 194. However, best practice may require specific regulation -making powers rather than general regulation -making power s that could be vulnerable to legal challenge. 195. The issues discussed below are not an exclusive list of the emerging technologies and issues that may warrant regulation in the future. They are intended only to illustrate the pace of change in the space sector and the need for the regime to include flexible mechanisms , such as regulation making powers , so that the law can keep pace with technol ogy. ANALYSIS CONSTELLATIONS 196. The emergence of satellite constellations has posed new challenges because most international rules, norms and standards are premised on the operation of a single satellite and are not intended to, and may not be capable of, de aling with the issues raised by large constellations. 197. A specific concern has recently been raised by the International Astronomical Union (IAU) that the number of new low -Earth orbit satellite constellations interferes with optical and radio astronomy and the need to keep dark and quiet skies for science and society. 198. These concerns have arisen in the context of large constellations, such as the SpaceX Starlink , rather than in the context of small constellations of the kind that have thus far been launch ed from New Zealand . However, we cannot rule out the possibility in the future of applications for payload permits being made for payloads that will contribute to very large constellations. 199. MBIE is currently developing a constellations policy , but policies cannot create binding obligations and there may well be a need for regulations in the future , including regulations designed to protect the dark and quiet skies. THE EMERGENCE OF VERY SMALL SATELLITES 200. The miniaturisation of satellite technology h as revolutionised space making it more affordable and opening space to new space actors, such as Rocket Lab. Some of the satellites launched by Rocket Lab have been very small satellites of less than 1U (a “U” or unit is equivalent to a 10cm cube) . 201. There a re several new technologies emerging that are aimed at improving the ability to track very small satellites. Submissions to the review, for example , mentioned beacon technology and
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 32 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 propulsion as potentially useful technologies. Other passive means of de -orbiting are also being considered . 202. MBIE has adopted a policy for managing very small satellites, but it is foreseeable in the future that regulations relating to the tracking of satellites and management of collision risks will be required as international standards and norms develop about how to regulate satellites using these new technologies . ACTIVE DEBRIS REMOVAL 203. The growing quantity of debris in space poses a danger to users of the orbital environment, such as spacecraft. It also increases the risk that humans or manmade structures could be impacted when objects re -enter Earth’s atmosphere. There is increasing international interest in technologies that could assist in managing the problem of debris , such as active debris removal and on -orbit servicing o f satellites. 204. These give rise to complex legal issues, including whether consent of the owner of the debris is required, what happens whe n there is no identifiable owner, how the liability rules operate in the context of space debris removal and on -orbit servicing , and the respective roles and responsibilities of the servicing and client states. 205. However, these technologies are potentially very beneficial and again it is foreseeable that regulations will be required to provide for their use in the future. THE UTILISATION OF SPACE RESOURCES 206. The US is embarking on the largest space exploration programme since the Apollo Moon landings in the 1960s and 1970s. The Artemis Program prioritises the development of space resource utilisation technologies to enable dee p-space exploration missions beyond the Moon and to Mars. The term ‘space resource utilisation’ refers to the extraction and use of resources available on the Moon and other celestial bodies. While the immediate interest in space resource utilisation relat es to using those resources, such as water, that would facilitate exploration beyond the Moon, there is also the potential for mining for commercial purposes. 207. While NASA is leading the Artemis missions, it regards international partnerships with both gover nments and private sector actors as playing a key role in achieving a sustainable return to the Moon and the first human mission to Mars. 208. Accordingly, it invited several countries, including New Zealand , to join the Artemis Accords. This required New Zeala nd to agree to a non -binding set of principles designed to guide the safe and sustainable exploration of outer space, including principles relating to the utilisation of space resources. The issue of space resource utilisation is also being discussed in the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space with a view to developing norms and standards 209. Rocket Lab is an early participant in the Artemis Program. It intends to launch the CAPSTONE payload as part of the program. This w ould involve Roc ket Lab launching a satellite to test the lunar orbit for the proposed Lunar Gateway - a small space station that will act as an orbiting outpost to facilitate later parts of the programme. 210. Accordingly, we recommend a new regulation making power to prescribe requirements on New Zealand nationals relating to the utilisation of space resources on the Moon and other celestial bodies. RECOMMENDATION 211. The Review recommend s that the MBIE consider th e inclusion of new regulation making powers to regulate new and emerging technologies when the OSHAA is next amended. The new
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 33 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 regulation making powers could include powers to make regulations regulating the activities that we have described above. 13) REMOTE SENSING STATUS QUO 212. Remote sensing is the science of acquiring information about an object or phenomenon from a distance. Remote sensing involves the collection of data about a sensed object, area, or activity by making use of the electromagnetic wave s emitted, reflected, or diffracted by the sensed object, area, or activity. Remote sensing can involve Earth observation or the observation of other objects in space. Remote sensing activities offer enormous benefits for science and a range of other disci plines but can give rise to national security risks and may give rise to national interest concerns. 213. The Act does not currently contain specific provisions relating to remote sensing activities but does have general provisions for managing national securi ty risks and protecting the national interest. These apply to remote sensing as well as to other space activities. They include the power of the Minister to decline a permit if the Minister is not satisfied that the grant of a permit is in the national int erest and the power to impose conditions on a permit. 214. The Act also contains a power to make regulations prescribing conditions or licences and permits which may include providing for the imposition of requirements relating to the collection and disseminati on of data obtained by remote sensing. However, at this stage no regulations have been made relating to the collection and dissemination of remote sensing data. 215. There are also regulations prescribing the information a licensee must submit with a licence application, including some that are specific to remote sensing. Clause s 13 and 14 of schedule 4 of the Outer Space and High - Altitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulations 2017 require applicants to provide the following information in relation to p ayloads with remote sensing capability: 216. A description of any payload sensors and a summary of their capability, including information about the payload’s : a) resolution, field of view, and field of regard; and b) on-board storage and processing capabilities; an d c) geolocation accuracy; and d) persistence. 217. A summary of the proposed recipients of any enhanced and raw remote -sensing data, including details of : a) any customers or classes of customers who will receive enhanced remote -sensing data; and b) whether the applicant will provide any raw data to any customers or classes of customers; and c) any plans to provide the raw data generated by the payload — i. to governments whose territories have been sensed; or ii. for non -commercial, scientific, educational, or other public benefit p urposes. 218. MBIE has not published a formal remote sensing policy. However, the Minister has agreed an approach to regulating remote sensing payload permits to protect national security and other national interest concerns. The approach involves relying on the technic al controls imposed by
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 34 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 an overseas licence and otherwise imposing conditions on all remote sensing payloads that require the permit holder not to supply data to designated terrorist entities or to entities that are subject to our UN Sanctions Regulations. ISSUES 219. The GCSB and NZSIS jointly submitted that it may be appropriate to enact regulations relating to the collection and dissemination of remote sensing data. 220. Two issues arise in considering the content of any remote sensing regulations . First whether th e current requirement that payload applicants who carry out remote sensing activities provide information about their ‘customers or classes of customers ’ is necessary or appropriate. Second whether steps should be taken to implement the UN’s ‘Principles re lating to Remote Sensing of the Earth from Outer Space.’ ANALYSIS 221. We agree there is a case for dealing with remote sensing in a single set of regulations given recent technological advances, particularly Kea’s development of high -altitude pseudo -satellite that has remote sensing capabilities. Currently the specific information requirements for remote sensing in the Outer Space and High -altitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulations 2017 apply only to payload permit applications. Rather than replicat ing the requirements for high-altitude applications, it would make sense to consolidate the requirements in a single set of regulations dealing with remote sensing. 222. An issue that arises with the current regulations is whether the existing requirement that the applicant provide information about “customers and classes of customers” is necessary or appropriate. The requirement is intended to identify end use customers t o assist in managing national security and complicity risks. However, it is potentially problematic because commercial remote sensing products are widely available on the open market and many remote sensing companies will not necessarily know who their end use customers are. Even if they do know their customers, the products can be resold on the open market so there is simply no guarantee about where they will end up. The question i s, does i t make sense to try to impose restrictions on products that are rea dily available ? However , there is also a view that more detailed information about an operator ’s customer base should be required if the operator has military or intelligence agencies as customers. 223. The enactment of new regulations would provide an opportu nity to revisit this issue to assess whether our current approach is sound. One option is to consider the use of end user licence agreements which is the approach taken in Canada. It would also be useful to consult with the US. The US has recently adopted much less restrictive remote sensing regulations because of concerns that its earlier approach disadvantaged US companies without protecting national security , due to the availability of remote sensing data from companies operating outside the US. It would be interesting to know how the new regulations operate in practice and whether any issues have resulted from taking a less restrictive approach. 224. The other matter worth considering is whether to implement the UN’s ‘Principles relating to Remote Sensing of the Earth from Outer Space' and including a principle that the sensed state shall have access to remote sensing data on a non -discriminatory basis and on reasonable cost terms. The legislation in both the US and Canada require s the operators of remote sens ing systems to make available to the government of any country unenhanced data collected by the system concerning the territory under the jurisdiction of such government on reasonable terms and conditions. 225. Apart from these matters , we anticipate the regul ations would include our current standard condition forbidding applicants for licences or permits from supplying data to designated terrorist
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 35 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 entities or to entities that are subject to our UN Sanctions Regulations and would otherwise empower the Minister to impose any other condition necessary to manage New Zealand’s national interests. RECOMMENDATIONS 226. The Review recommend s the enactment of regulations relating to the collection and dissemination of data obtained by remote sensing. These would apply to bot h applicants for payload permits and applicants for high -altitude licences if the payload or vehicle carries out remote sensing. 14) NATIONAL INTEREST ASSESSMENT STATUS QUO LAW 227. In each of the licen sing and permitting provisions of the Act, the Minister may, despite being satisfied of all other prescribed matters (eg in relation to safety, compliance with international obligations etc.), decline to grant a licence or permit on national interest grounds. 228. In considering the national interest the Minister ma y have regard to — • economic or other benefits to New Zealand of the proposed operation; • any risks to national security, public safety, international relations, or other national interests; • the extent to which the risks can be mitigated by licence or permit conditions; • any other matters that the Minister considers relevant. PRACTICE 229. To date no national interest analysis has been undertaken, but all applications are assessed to determine whether such an analysis should be undertaken. 230. A number of operational , policy and decision -making frameworks have been developed to inform decisions on whether to undertake national interest analysis and the processes to be followed if is undertaken. These include MBIE, ministerial and Cabinet approved activities, as set o ut below. MBIE APPROVED • Operational decisions on the level of detail that payload applicants must provide on their customers. • The documentation of a National Interest Process to determine whether to undertake a national interest analysis. This states tha t ‘Officials will undertake a National Interest Assessment (NIA) only when high risks are present, as determined by a risk review.’ MINISTER APPROVED • Ministerial agreement to a policy on commercial remote sensing payloads (Commercial remote sensing paylo ads: national interest considerations and proposed approach to permitting (7 March 2019)). • The current development of policies on mega constellations and potentially other topics. CABINET APPROVED
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 36 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 • Cabinet agreement to an approach to payload permitting under the Act with the objective of enabling a ‘consistent payload permitting decisions, particularly with regard to government applicants.’ The approach included: o PRINCIPLES : The following principles will guide decision -making: ▪ Responsibility – space ac tivities from New Zealand should promote an orbital environment where users avoid causing harm or interference with the activities of others. ▪ Sustainability – space activities from New Zealand should preserve the benefits of space for future generations th rough adherence to sustainable practices. ▪ Safety – space activities from New Zealand should not jeopardise the safety of people on the ground or in space. ▪ Space activities authorised by the Government should reflect New Zealand’s values and interests and align with broader policy settings. o ACTIVITIES NOT IN THE NATIONAL INTEREST: The following activities will not be approved: ▪ payloads that contribute to nuclear weapons programmes or capabilities. ▪ payloads with the intended end use of harming, interfering with, or destroying other spacecraft, or space systems on Earth. ▪ payloads with the intended end use of supporting or enabling specific defence, security or intelligence operations that are contrary to government policy. ▪ payloads where the inten ded end use is likely to cause serious or irreversible harm to the environment. ISSUE 231. The Minister is able to decline an application for a licence or permit on national interest grounds even when other tests in the Act are met. Effective use of this provis ion requires complete and accurate information on the capability and intended use of payloads in particular (in future high -altitude vehicles or HAVs), clear and agreed criteria in relation to what may be contrary to the national interest, and the involve ment of relevant agencies and Ministers in the advice and decision -making process. However, what may be contrary to the national interest can both evolve over time and be application -specific, and hence there are inevitable uncertainties and resolving thes e through licensing and permitting can be time -consuming. 232. Operating a responsive regulatory system that supports space industry development requires licence and permit applicants to have maximum regulatory certainty, minimum compliance costs and timely d ecisions. The issue highlighted in submissions is the need for updated operational, policy and decision -making frameworks for ensuring that activities that are contrary to the national interest are not licensed or permitted, while continuing to deliver a r esponsive regulatory system that supports space industry development. ANALYSIS 233. The national interest provisions in the Act were intended to be a final safeguard, to allow the government to prevent or impose conditions on space -related activities that woul d otherwise be approved. National interest is not defined in the Act and ill -defined generally, but in this context
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 37 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 would include New Zealand’s values as well as interests ranging from our international reputation to defence and security. 234. Notably in th is Act , economic benefits (as well as other benefits) can explicitly be taken into account in assessing the national interest. This is consistent with the first purpose in the Act, to facilitate the development of a space industry as well as provide for it s safe and secure operation. 235. Outer space and increasingly high altitude, has significant strategic value for state and non -state actors, and can be used for both offensive and defensive purposes. Some of these purposes are consistent with New Zealand’s val ues and interests and others are contrary to them. 236. As one of the few launching states, New Zealand also has the opportunity to promote and protect our interests through permitting activities that, for example, contribute to our defence and security, as w ell as influencing global norms and rules. 237. Acting in accordance with New Zealand’s values and interests requires a good understanding of what these are in a space context, and with sufficient specificity that they are able to be operationalised within the framework of the Act. No submitter is suggesting changes are required to the Act or regulations, and the Review Team agrees with this. Hence, the articulation of New Zealand’s values and interests, and the right level of specificity, will need to be provid ed in policies and decision -making frameworks. RECOMMENDATION S MORE SPECIFIC NATIONAL INTEREST CRITERIA SHOULD BE DEVELOPED 238. The Review Team is required to consider the operation and effectiveness of the Act, and how it might be improved operationally. T he Team is of the view that the effectiveness of the national interest provisions of the Act require clear criteria against which to assess whether a national interest assessment should be undertaken, and what should be taken into account in the assessment . 239. The Review Team recommends that consideration be given to developing more specific national interest criteria. These may need to be reflected in a revision of, and agreement by Cabinet to, the Approach to payload assessments under the Outer Space and H igh-altitude Activities Act, which was agreed by Cabinet in 2019, in relation to both the ‘Principles that guide decision making’ and ‘Activities that are not in the national interest’. REFLECT SPACE INDUSTRY AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES THROUGH ESTABLISHING POLICY SETTINGS IN ADVANCE OF APPLICATIONS AND CONSIDER ESTABLISH ING TIME LIMITS 240. Space industry development (in the Purpose to the Act) and economic benefits (in the factors that the Minister may take into account in assessing the national i nterest) are key features of the regulatory regime. The effectiveness of the Act depends on these outcomes being achieved. 241. Licence and permit applicants value maximum regulatory certainty, minimum compliance costs and timely decisions. Not addressing the se will inevitably make New Zealand a less attractive place to undertake space activities. 242. Clearer criteria against which to assess whether a national interest assessment should be undertaken, and what should be taken into account in the assessment, s hould provide greater certainty, speed up the analysis, and allow decisions to be taken more quickly. Asking applicants to provide more information will increase compliance costs but should also reduce the time required to undertake due diligence of an app lication. 243. However, while the Review Team accepts some applications have a level of novelty that New Zealand’s national interest stance will be determined through the assessment process, generally
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 38 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 policy should be established in advance as this contributes to certainty and timely decision -making. 244. Hence, the Review Team is of the view that continuing an upfront investment in establishing and keeping up -to-date policy on matters of national interest significance is important, noting that the policy will in most cases cover space industry and economic benefits as well as risks. There is a policy on remote sensing, but there are plans to update this, and work is underway on policies for mega constellations and space resources. 245. The Review Team also consider s that establishing time limits for decision -making on payload applications could be considered. UPDATE THE NATIONAL INTEREST PROCESS 246. Changes to criteria will inevitably require MBIE’s National Interest Process to be updated. Matters that should be take n into account include the level of detail provided in the advice to the Minister on complex or sensitive payload applications, sharing of information between agencies in the course of assessing whether a national interest assessment should be undertaken a nd when it is being undertaken, and refresh ing the types of information applicants are being asked to provide.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 39 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 PART FOUR: INTRODUCTION TO OTHER ISSUES 247. The SPRS team, having had substantive experience in working with the Act and the associated regulations since their enactment, are well placed to understand how the regulatory regime operates in practice. With the benefit of this experience, they have identif ied a range of smaller technical matters where opportunities may exist to improve the Act or regulations. While many of the matters considered in this section were raised by MBIE, relevant feedback from other submitters was also received and has been integ rated into the appropriate sections accordingly. 248. These issues, as set out in Annex One, fall into four broad categories: • Improving clarity and addressing gaps: The Review has identified opportunities to refine the Act to provide clarity and address gaps or ambiguities within the regime. • Improvements to the operation and effectiveness of the Act – The Review has identifie d opportunities to improve the efficiency of the Act so it can better support its purpose. • Enabling future responsiveness – The Review has identified opportunities to further future proof the Act, for example to accommodate technological developments. • Other – This section covers the remaining lower -level considerations which do not fit within the categor ies above, but that are within the remit of the Review.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 4 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 14) National Interest assessment ................................ ................................ .............................. 35 Status Quo ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................... 35 Issue ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................. 36 Analysis ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 36 Recommendations ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 37 PART FOUR: I NTRODUCTION TO OTHER ISSUES ................................ ................................ ... 39 ANNEX ONE: TABLE OF OTHER ISSUES ................................ ................................ ................. 40 ANNEX TWO: RECORD OF OUT -OF-SCOPE SUBMISSIONS ................................ ..................... 48 ANNEX THREE: TERMS OF REFERENCE ................................ ................................ ................. 50
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 40 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 ANNEX ONE: TABLE OF OTHER ISSUES CATEGORY A: IMPROVING CLARITY AND ADDRESSING GAPS
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 41 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 • Creating a statutory power (in the Act) to re ject an application under circumstances when MBIE cannot accept an application.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 42 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 business opportunities , but while still providing a formal mechanism to disc ourage, and make explicit the unacceptability of, non -compliant behaviour. The Act does not explicitly allow the Chief Executive to appoint enforcement officers with a subset of the powers the Act provides. Space, Policy and Regulatory Team (MBIE) Other New Zealand acts ( eg Hazardous Substances and New Organisms Act 1996) that allow for enforcement officers expressly state that enforcement officers can be granted one or any of the powers in the Act and that the powers must be outlined in their warrant. It is desirable to take the opportunity to make it clearer on the face of the legislation that the Chief Executive can extend a limited subset of the powers to enforcement officers. The Review concludes it would be useful to refine the Act to provide greater clarity, so that it clearly and unambiguously empowers the Chief Executive to limit the powers granted to enforcement officers to only those that are commensurate wi th, and appropriate to, the particular circumstances. For instance, where an enforcement officer is primarily engaged to promote compliance with the Act, it is generally preferable that they do not have the power to use force to enforce debris protection a reas, so it is desirable that the Act clearly provides for the limitation or restriction of powers, at the Chief Executive’s discretion only be extended to suitably trained and qualified Government officials. To this end, the Review recommends that: • The re quirement that the Chief Executive must issue a written warrant to appointed enforcement officers (under section 57(3) of the Act) is retained; and that: • This clause of the Act is extended to expressly provide that, when issuing the warrant, the Chief Exec utive may choose to limit the functions and/or powers afforded to the enforcement officer, by specifying these on the warrant. The Act does not provide for the creation of single purpose enforcement officer with powers in relation to debris protection areas. Space, Policy and Regulatory Team (MBIE)
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 43 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 enforcement officer in debris protection areas. powers of an enforcement officer under this Act section 60(1(a) to (f), and sections 60(2) and 61 apply.” The Crown Minerals Act 1991 provides the ability for MBIE to grant non - interference zone permits, which provides for specific offences against the Act. No such provision currently exists in the Act, but it may be beneficial to include.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 44 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 timely information in the context of rapidly evolving and fast -moving space launch schedules.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 45 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 changes in the sector. Setting the conditions via regulations instead would enable greater responsiveness and help to ensure the system is better positioned to adapt as the sector continues to evolve. The term ‘enforcement officer’ can have negative connotations which Inspector/Compliance Officer can mitigate. Space, Policy and Regulatory Team (MBIE) The case for proposing the change in terminology in the regime from ‘enforcement officers’ to either ‘inspectors’ or ‘compliance officers’ is based on the following key factors: • It would align the terminology used in this regime with that used with the FAA and other New Zealand regulators. • It may also reduce any perceived issues with the term ‘enforcement officer.’ The Review recommends that the terminology be discussed with PCO. Where the term ‘payload’ is used in section 5(1)(b) of the Definition Regulations, it is not currently preceded by ‘high -altitude.’ Dawn Aerospace Section 5 of the Definitions Regulations prescribes the parameters or conditions for when a balloon is not classified as a high -altitude vehicle for the purpose of the Act. Section 5(1)(b) reads “…the purpose of the payload is solely to measure all or any of…” Dawn Aerospace, however, has expressed the view that this should be ‘high -altitude payload’ rather than just ‘payload.’ The reasoning behind this suggest ion was not offered in the submission. This is a minor drafting issue that should be discussed with PCO when the regulations are revised. The Act defines the term high -altitude vehicle as follows: ‘high -altitude vehicle, subject to any regulations made under section 88(1) (13), means an aircraft or any other vehicle that travels, is intended to travel, or is capable of travelling to high altitude’ Dawn Aerospace Dawn Aerospace submits the definition should be refined so that it only req uires a high - altitude licence only if a vehicle is intended to go into high -altitude. The Space Policy and Regulatory team question whether the ‘capability’ aspect of the definition is workable in the context of vehicles which are being progressively devel oped to reach high -altitude. For example, at what point i n Dawn Aerospace’s testing and upgrade process are its vehicles capable of reaching high -altitude? At the time the legislation was developed, it was a deliberate decision to include vehicles that are capable of going into high -altitude in the regime. The concerns about safety and consistency with the national interest arise are the same whether a vehicl e is intended to go into high -altitude or is merely capable of it. We do not consider there are workability issues where vehicles are being progressively developed and tested. It will be a question of fact at any given point in time whether or not the vehi cle is capable of going into high -altitude. However, the issue should be monitored and if we are wrong and there are difficulties applying it, officials should work with PCO to refine it when the legislation is amended. The question of whether the current physical inspection systems in place are sufficient to pre -detect risks that may lead to an incident was raised via the submissions process. NZSIS and GCSB The NZSIS and GCSB suggested that it may be worth asking whether the physical inspection systems in place are sufficient to pre -detect risks that may lead to an incident. For example, no enforcement officers have been appointed yet under section 57, and they are not aware of anyone else performing that in spection function (though the Protective Security Requirements ( PSR) team do some in relation to security), so it remains unclear how much would be caught under current processes unless an incident were to actually occur. In other words, absence of an inc ident is not necessarily evidence of absence of risk. The Review team notes that Space Policy and Regulatory systems team has a compliance strategy that employs several tools to manage compliance and that is specifically tailored to the nature of the indus try and risks it poses. Mechanisms for ensuring compliance include regular reviews of Rocket Lab’s protective security plans and regular engagement with Rocket Lab. In a regulatory system where there is only one regulated party there is less of a role for inspection than in systems where the regulator has to regulate a very large number of regulated parties. Use of advisory circulars to support compliance Dawn Aerospace Dawn Aerospace invites consideration of the potential to use advisory circulars (ACs) (and potentially other instruments) as part of the regime. In response to this suggestion, the Review team discussed this with the CAA, as they use ACs in their regime. CAA indicated that they find ACs to be very helpful, noting that they offer excellent f lexibility (a lot more so than regulations) and are effective in supporting compliance with rules. They also allow people to have other solutions that are not in the AC, but that meet the rules. In the context of aviation, those in the industry tend to be familiar with this type of instrument too. The Review can see the merit in using advisory circulars because they are familiar to participants in the civil aviation system. Advisory circulars are used to provide guidance on means of compliance with the performance -based requirements of the regulations. While Advisory Circulars are intended to su pport compliance with statutory provisions, they do not have statutory status themselves, and no changes to the Act or regulations are required to enable or support the use of ACs.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 46 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 DEFINITION OF TECHNICAL DATA Technical data, as currently defined by the Act, means information in any form (including oral information, blueprints etc) that is required for the design, engineering, development, production, processing, manufacturing, use, operation, overhaul, repair, etc. of launch vehicles, payloads, high -altitude vehicles, high -altitude payloads or related equipment, but does not include publicly available information. NB: This is a summarised version of the definition Rocket Lab Rocket Lab is of the view that the t erm ‘technical data’ as currently defined is too broad, and that it extends to the inclusion of information which they consider to be benign and which should not be restricted, nor require the controls to applied by the Act. In response to this submission , the Review considered whether there is a case for refinements to be made in light of this comment, starting with an assessment of all sections of the Act where it features and the impact that it has in practice.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 47 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 Under the space treaties, launching states are liable for loss and damage caused by space activities. The Act gives the Minister power to impose indemnity and insurance conditions on licensees and permit holders. However, to date, in the case of payload permits, insurance requirements have not been imposed. Liability has been managed by avoiding collision risks through appropriate orbital debris mitigation plans .
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 48 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 ANNEX TWO: RECORD OF OUT -OF-SCOPE SUBMISSIONS
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 49 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 frequencies), Rocket Lab indicated that they were receptive to commenting on appropriate metrics by which the direct and indirect costs of administration which may be recovered so as not to conflict with the goal of further developing the in dustry.5 By way of comparison, the FAA Office of Commercial Space Transportation (FAA -AST) does not accept payment or fees for licensing or permitting activities. Licensing and permitting fees in New Zealand would discourage payload operators from using providers operating in New Zealand, or industry or academia developing payloads and the associated economic activity, in an already highly mobile and international market. The question of whether to impose fees, levies and/ or charges is a policy question, for the Minister to consider. As no statutory amendments are required, and this issue is a policy matter, the Review makes no recommendations in respect to this theme.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 5 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 PART ONE: INTRODUCTION 1. RATIONALE FOR REGULATING SPACE ACTIVITIES 1.1. ESTABLISHING THE CASE FOR INTERVENTION 1. In December 2015, Cabinet approved the high -level design of a regulatory regime to enable commercial space launches and the operation of payloads (eg satellites) from New Zealand (CAB 15 Min 0274 refers). 2. At that time, New Zealand did not have a regulatory regime for space launches, and there was limited scope to prevent anyone from launching space objects. The need to develop legislation , what would ultimately become the Outer Space and High -altitude Activities Act 2017 (OSHAA) , was precipitated by Rocket Lab’s intention to launch from New Zealand from 2016. 3. Becoming a launch state triggered new obligations under international treaties which New Zealand was already party to and legislative changes w ere required to give practical effect to treaty provisions that had not previously applied (ie when not a launch state). Legislative change was also needed to implement the Technology Safeguard Agreement (TSA) with the US Government, which was being negotiated at the time. 4. The design of the regulatory regime considered the need to manage risk and meet New Zealand’s international obligations , but also the potential economic benefits of having a space industry. New Zealand adopted a permissive regime that provides what is necessary to meet international obligations and manage risks, while not imposing unnecessary regul atory costs which could deter the growth and development of the space industry. 5. The establishment of a commercial space industry in New Zealand presented significant economic and strategic opportunities, including: • Estimated economic benefits to New Zealan d of $750m to $1.550bn over a 20 -year period1, including employment opportunities both directly within the space industry as well as in associated supporting industries . • Building capability and expertise in space activities and applying associated advance d technologies (eg space propulsion and carbon composites) to a range of downstream applications . • Potential intangible or unquantifiable benefits from the reputational impacts of being a first mover in the development of low -cost, high -frequency space laun ches. 1.2. EXTENDING THE SCOPE TO HIGH -ALTITUDE VEHICLES 6. Rocket Lab’s proposal to launch rockets to space from New Zealand was the catalyst for developing the regime and the original scope of the work reflected this, in that it was limited to outer space activities. In the course of developing the regime a case was identified to include high - altitude activities within its scope, and Cabinet agreed to its inclusion . 7. The concept of regulating high -altitude vehicles (HAVs) was relatively novel at the time. W hile other countries are now regulating HAVs, New Zealand was at the forefront.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 50 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 ANNEX THREE: TERMS OF REFERENCE Review of the Outer Space and High -altitude Activities Act 2017 Terms of Reference
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 6 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 8. The rationale for including HAVs within the scope of the regulatory regime was based on the following key factors: • To ‘future proof’ the legislation in anticipation of technol ogical advances . • To promote or enable consistent regulatory treatment across different technologies that perform similar functions . • To provide certainty for commercial operators about the rules that apply to their activities in New Zealand, recognising th at a lack of certainty around this may have an inhibitory effect on investment in research and development activities, and new business ventures. • To ensure New Zealand is well placed to have appropriate oversight and control of high - altitude activities th at originate from within its territory. 2. KEY FEATURES OF REGULATORY REGIME 2.1. SYSTEM OBJECTIVES 9. New Zealand’s regulatory regime for outer space and high -altitude activities is designed to fulfil the core system objectives. The objectives, which form the basis of the Act’s purpose, are to: • Facilitate the development of a space industry and provide for its safe and secure operation . • Implement certain international obligations relating to space activities and space technology . • Manage any potential or actual liability that may arise from the space industry . • Preserve New Zealand’s national security and national interests. 2.2. KEY ELEMENTS OF THE REGIME 10. The OSHAA provides a flexible regulatory regime for space and high -altitude activities, with licensing and permitting functions primarily being achieved throu gh its associated regulations, policies and operational procedures (including for launch vehicles, facilities, payloads, and high - altitude vehicles). 11. An overview of the core elements of the regime is set out below. LICEN SING AND PERMITTING 12. Internationally , standard practice for regulating commercial space activities is a licensing regime that provides the necessary controls over participation in space launches, including powers to veto launches and/or payloads. Commonly, this takes the form of an overarchi ng licence for a certain type of activity or context (eg space launches) with the option to impose specific requirements via licence conditions. 13. New Zealand adopted a permissive licensing and permitting regime that affords the decision - maker with discreti on around imposing licence conditions (as opposed to providing detailed conditions in primary legislation). 14. New Zealand’s regime provides for six categories of permits and licences, as follows: • Launch licence (New Zealand based ) • Overseas l aunch licence ( for New Zealand nationals overseas ) • Payload permit (New Zealand based) • Overseas p ayload permit ( for New Zealand nationals overseas ) • Facility licence
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 7 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 • High -altitude licence . 15. The Outer Space Treaty requires states parties to regulate ‘national activities ’ in ou ter space. This has generally been interpreted as a requirement to licen se activities that take place within a state’s territory and activities that are carried out by its nationals overseas. Accordingly, the launch licen sing and payload permitting provisi ons in the Act have extraterritorial application. RECOGNITION OF INTERNATIONAL AUTHORISATIONS 16. Section 51 of the Act prescribes that the Minister may take into account authorisations granted in countries other than New Zealand. Specifically, section 51(1) prescribes “the Minister may treat a licence, permit, or other authorisation that concerns a matter relevant to the Minister’s decision and that was granted, or is lik ely to be granted, to an applicant or other person in a country other than New Zealand as satisfying some or all of the criteria for granting a launch licence under section 9 , a payload permit under section 17 , an overseas launch licence under section 25 , an overseas payload permit under section 33 , or a facility licence under section 40 .” 17. The recognition of international authorisations, where appropriate, creates significant benefits for the regulator and regulated parties alike, by limiting duplication of effort and unnecessary costs and allowing New Zealand to leverage the experience of regulatory agencies in other jurisdictions. 18. This feature of the Act is particularly important in the context of launch licen sing because of the comprehensive requirements that apply to launch licen sing, at least in the US. As Rocket Lab noted in its submission, the ability for the Minister to recognise its US Federal Aviation Administration ( FAA) licence “has supported rapid development of New Zea land -based endeavours, which in turn has encouraged and supported the local space and associated technology industry and economy.” The Minister has also recognised certain overseas licences and permits as meeting New Zealand’s orbital debris mitigation requirements. However, as the assessment of orbital debris mitigation plans is a much more straightforward process than the assessment of launch licence applications , this is of less significance. REGULATION MAKING POWERS 19. The regime provides a broad range of regulation -making powers . These were intended as a means of future proofing the regime because technologies relating to space and high -altitude activities are rapidly evolving. The range of regulation -making powers in the Act supports flexibility by providing options for classifying, and therefore managing, new technologies. That is not to say regulations must be made but they are available if necessary. 20. The regulation -making powers do not, in and of themselves, create any new costs or compliance burden s for the regulated parties, but having them available where required, supports the responsiveness and flexibility of the system ’s permissive approach. 21. Using regulation -making powers as a tool to future pr oof the regime was , and still is, considered to be the optimal approach to managing the challenges of regulating an industry undergoing fast - paced technological change and provides flexibility for the regulatory settings to evolve as new information becomes available and industry practice changes. 22. Two o f the regulation -making powers were invoked alongside the introduction of the Act in late 2017, namely: • Outer Space and High -altitude Activities (Definition of High -altitude Vehicle) Regulations 2017 (the Definition Regulations): To provide clarification regarding vehicles that are not classified as high -altitude vehicles (HAV s) for the purpose of the Act and therefore will not require a licence.
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 8 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 • Outer Space and High -altitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulations 2017 (the Licences and Permits R egulations): To provide the requirements for licences and permit s, particularly in relation to the information which applicants must provide . 23. In addition to the two which have already been invoked, the regime provides a broad range of other regulation -making powers, designed to empower the regulator with the flexibility needed to keep pace as the risk profile of the sector evolves and technology changes. The regulation - making provisions include, for example, powers to define (in regulation) c ertain terms (eg launch vehicle, payload, space objects); and to impose levies, fees and charges. 24. While several regulation -making powers are currently unused, retaining them in the Act provides flexibility to regulate future issues. The Ministry of Busine ss, Innovation and Employment’s (MBIE) Space Policy and Regulatory Systems ( SPRS ) team are of the view , and we agree, that broad regulation -making powers are necessary, and none of the powers are being used in ways that are not justified. OPERATIONAL POLI CIES AND GUIDANCE MATERIAL 25. To support the industry to meet the statutory criteria, MBIE’s SPRS team publishes guidance material for a range of topics. 26. In most cases, the published guidance takes the form of outlining the operational policy that is applie d by MBIE in the course of considering applications. Guidance of this nature is provided on the following topics : • Orbital debris mitigation • Liability, insurance and indemnities • Payloads of a size less than 1U • Technical capability . 27. The safety case guidance is the exception. Instead of setting out the operational policy for how the application is assessed by MBIE, the safety case guidance is focused on assisting applicants in meeting the current safety case requirements. 2.3. KEY FACTS AND FIGURES ON IMPLEMENTATI ON APPLICATIONS FOR LICENCES AND PERMITS 28. MBIE has administered the licensing and permitting regime established by the Act since its inception. 29. The table below (Table 1) provides data on licensing and permitting activity under the Act from the time it came into force (on 21 December 2017) until 28 April 2022 .
MINISTRY OF BUSINESS, INNOVATION & EMPLOYMENT 9 Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -Altitude Activities Act 2017 Table 1: Licen sing and permitting activity under the Act (21 December 2017 – 28 April 2022 )2
MIQ capacity and allocations
MITIGATION OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT Robert Howell This submitter expressed concern that the Act does not feature any provisions about caring for, or avoiding any damage to the environment, and made reference to climate change matters.
MPs' pay was frozen in 2018, after the Government determined that the proposed salary increase to be unjustifiably high. The freeze allowed time for us to do work to ensure the settings for determining MPs' pay are appropriate.
Mahi Tahi - Better Together
Maintaining the pace for the great rides
Maintains overall oversight of the status of the Prosecution policy
Maintains overall oversight of this policy
Major Events Fund or Creative and Cultural Events Incubator
Major commercial sporting events such as cricket and rugby fixtures
Major in sport and exercise
Make a complaint about the appointment process
Make a request for official information
Make an online request to the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment under the Official Information Act (OIA).
Make changes to work visas to ensure settings are better focussed on facilitating the right mix of skilled migrants and that New Zealanders are first in line for jobs. (MBIE)
Make sure you save your password and form link exactly as displayed.
Making a complaint to the Privacy Commissioner
Making a request for personal information
Making employees aware of this policy and the procedure and guidelines that support compliance with it
Making it easier to build granny flats (2024)
Making it easier to do business with Government, Business Connect is a new digital service platform that will allow businesses to apply for things like licences and permits from different government agencies in one place.
Making sure people know their rights and responsibilities.
Making the most of the benefits of tourism
Making visa processing more efficient
Mana Whanonga Pirihimana Motuhake
Managed Isolation and Quarantine
Managed isolation and quarantine (MIQ) charges allow the Government to recover some of the costs for MIQ. The aim of the charges is to share the costs in a way that fairly reflects the benefits to both the New Zealand public of having a robust system, and those who leave and enter the country.
Managed isolation and quarantine data
Managed isolation was an essential part of our border measures to protect New Zealand from COVID-19. All MIQ facilities are now closed.
Manager Legal Services (Litigation)
Manager, Employment Standards Policy
Managers and People Leaders
Managers are required to report any breaches of the policy, any adverse comments by courts, and any costs awarded against MBIE in MBIE prosecutions to the Chief Legal Officer.
Managing Director, iNZight Analytics; Deputy Director, Healthier Lives National Science Challenge; Associate Professor (Honorary) of Statistics, University of Auckland
Managing conflicts of interest: A guide for the public sector
Managing earthquake-prone buildings
Managing environmental and social issues
Managing health and safety
Manaia has worked for 30 years as a primary school teacher. She loved the job, but chronic back pain due to osteoarthritis means she can no longer bend down to help her young students with their studies.
Manapouri is a small town in Fiordland that is the gateway for journeys to Doubtful Sound, along with a variety of renowned walking tracks. Prior to COVID-19, peak visitor demand to the area caused traffic hazards and shoreline deterioration, including significant wear and tear on the local boat ramp, car park and toilet facilities. This detracted from the visitor experience and undermined local support for tourism in the area. The Tourism Infrastructure Fund contributed $1.1 million to upgrade this infrastructure
Manawatu-Whanganui Overview
Mandate membership in an industry dispute resolution scheme for retail telecommunications providers with annual telecommunications revenue over $10 million
Mandatory climate-related disclosures
Mandatory requirements in the Act
Manufacturing sector report 2018
Manufacturing sector report 2018 - key facts and findings
Many aspects of DM could already be captured in existing plans. Some destinations may want to take a light touch approach, coordinating components of existing plans and identifying gaps and new areas to focus on. Other destinations may choose to embark on a full DM planning process.
Many businesses are already working to identify and address risks of modern slavery in their domestic and international supply chains. Government guidance is available to support businesses to embed ethical and sustainable work practices, and help develop social practice due diligence systems. Links to government resources and a selection of international guidance is available below.
Many can be studied/earned under apprenticeships:
Many countries have developed policy and regulatory measures to support the shift towards a more circular economy. These aim to encourage circular practices, resource efficiency and avoid the creation of waste. Recent measures, mostly over the past 5 years, include:
Many employers already use accrual -based systems to provide earlier access to AL . The agreed approach reinforces the need for the complex and confusing workarounds the se employers have need ed to build into their systems to ensure compliance. • Replace the first part of the 2020 decision with a weeks -based AL accrual system that would treat all weeks of AL an employee has ‘earned’ as a single, continuous ly accruing, pot of entitlement. This pr oposal would simplify the provision of AL entitlement and better support common practice . It would also resolve issues with the rules for paying employees for outstanding AL when employment ends and simplify the provisions related to annual closedown perio ds and record -keeping. • Provide a clear set of parameters to support the operation of a weeks -based accrual system that: o specify AL entitlement accrues at a rate of not less than 0.0768 weeks per week of employment (regardless of the number of hours actually worked in a week) ; o provide clarity about the weeks of employment that AL accrues during . These would align with the weeks that are included in “12 months ’ continuous employment ”10 under the Act; o specify a rule f or reducing the divisor for the average weekly earnings (AWE) calculation to account for periods of unpaid leave which align s with the status quo ;11 o provide clear formula s for determining the amount of AL that would accrue during a part week of unpaid leav e12 and the AWE divisor reduction for a part week of unpaid leave .13
Many factors affect the lives of New Zealanders, including global forces such as climate change, COVID-19, and economic changes as well as national factors such as policy and regulatory change.
Many of the deliverables for this sub-pillar relate to ongoing activities by agencies to support victims to participate in the criminal justice process, including through the provision of appropriate support.
Many of the following can be studied/earned under apprenticeships:
Many participants indicated that the general framework of the draft Bill is not a significant improvement on the current Holidays Act and that more fundamental changes to the leave system would better address the longstanding issues with the Holidays Act. Key reasons given included complexity, compliance costs and workability for those with variable work arrangements.
Many professions generally require additional learning, testing and certification to be completed after achieving academic qualifications. This is to ensure consistent standards are being met across the sector. Transitioning the New Zealand interpreter workforce into the NAATI Certification System will support the professionalisation of the interpreting sector in New Zealand.
Many space careers require a degree or some sort of apprenticeship to get you started. Below are some degree/apprenticeship options, but check out the universities for their full range of offerings.
Many types of working arrangements exist, including permanent, fixed-term and casual employees, as well as contractors and self-employed people. What do you think about our proposals to cover a broad range of working arrangements?
Map of the Great Rides with Estimated Revenue for 2015 [PDF 2MB]
Mapping emissions and waste data in the manufacturing sector
Marae Digital Connectivity Programme
March 2025 update to telephone and video interpreting services
Marine bioactives from New Zealand: Supporting investment in the emerging marine bioactives platform
Marine collagen we have had a lot of new firms come into this space and we are now producing a lot of our own marine collagen.
Maritime people smuggling and trafficking research product scheduled for release.
Market forecast summaries
Market study into residential building supplies
Market study into retail fuel
Marketing and promotion (Awareness)
Massey University submitted its proposal to host the centre with support from research providers AgResearch, Cawthron Institute, ESR, Plant and Food Research, the University of Auckland and the University of Otago.
Master of Aerospace Engineering
Master of Engineering Studies
Master of Laws (International Law and Politics)
Master of Space Studies (this is a new programme at University of Canterbury, starting in 2022)
Matariki projects star in latest round of Tourism Infrastructure Fund
Material flow and Sankey diagram findings
Matt Glenn, CEO, Kiwifruit Breeding Centre
Maximise contribution from both domestic and international visitors while they are here, ensuring that they spend more, and on higher-quality experiences.
Maximum $100,000 co-funding
Mayor Hon Stephanie (Steve) Chadwick, Rotorua District (co-Chair)
Measures for transition to an expanded and highly renewable electricity system
Measures of changes in job vacancies advertised by businesses on 3 internet job boards
Measures of success and compliance management
Measures of the expenditure, characteristics and behaviours of international visitors to New Zealand
Mediation / Restorative Justice
Mediation to help resolve employment issues
Mediation to help resolve issues with rented housing
Mediation to support agreements between parents for the care of their children
Mediation within the Canterbury Earthquakes Insurance Tribunal
Medical Council of New Zealand
Medical and Health Sciences has been divided into two more focused Divisions in the new FoR classification, and the Technology Division has been removed, in line with advice from researchers and users of the classification.
Medium and large organisations would be required to disclose the steps they are taking
Medium to long-term employment forecasts
Medium to long-term employment outlook: Looking ahead to 2026
Medium to long-term employment outlook: Looking ahead to 2028
Meeting Minutes of the Startup Advisors Council on 7 December 2022
Meeting Minutes of the Startup Advisors Council on August 8 2022
Meeting Minutes of the Startup Advisors Council on February 13 2022
Meeting Minutes of the Startup Advisors Council on June 27 2022
Meeting Minutes of the Startup Advisors Council on October 14 2022
Meeting in conjunction with the IEF, the International Energy Business Forum was set up:
Melanie Porter is the Deputy Secretary for Strategy and Assurance.
Melanie Porter, Deputy Secretary, Strategy and Assurance
Melanie Porter, Deputy Secretary, Strategy and Peformance
Members of the Advisory Group
Members of the Institute's Board of Governors are appointed by the Governor-General of New Zealand. The Minister of Tourism recommends Board members to the Governor-General.
Membership of the UN Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space - COPUOS [PDF 2.1MB]
Memorandum of Agreement on Labour Cooperation between the Government of New Zealand and the Government of the Republic of the Philippines (2009)
Memorandum of Cooperation between Immigration New Zealand, Ministry of Business Innovation and Employment of New Zealand and The Immigration Services Agency of Japan Regarding Information Sharing on Immigration Matters
Memorandum of Cooperation between the Government of New Zealand and the State of Colorado concerning cooperation on Science, Innovation and Technology [PDF 132KB]
Memorandum of Cooperation between the Government of New Zealand and the State of Colorado concerning...
Memorandum of Cooperation with the Japan Immigration Services
Memorandum of Understanding - Maori Spectrum Agreement [PDF 661KB]
Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of New Zealand and the Government of the Republic of Indonesia on Labour Cooperation (2012)
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum Page 1
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum Page 10 requirements of this confidentiality clause.
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum Page 11 21. Definitions in this Memorandum of Understanding 1) In this MOU, the following terms are defined as follows: Term Definition Radio spectrum , or spectrum The range of electromagnetic frequencies lower than 3000 gigahertz. Telecommunication See section 5 of the Telecommunication Act 2001 Broadcasting See section 2 of the Broadcasting Act 1989 Ka Hao Fund the Māori Digital Technology Development Fund created after the government allocated $30 million in 2014 to support initiatives that will create high value jobs and opportunities to advance Māori in digital technologies . Te Puni Kōkiri and the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment have joint responsibility f or the Ka Hao Fund, and Te Puni Kōkiri is the lead agency. Tahua Tautoko The accelerated industry investment initiative referred to in clause 11 of this MOU. Management Rights Spectrum property rights described in Parts 4 and 5 of the Radio communications Act 1989 Māori Spectrum Entity (MSE) means the entity that will be created to hold the assets and fulfil the functions as described in this MOU Interim Māori Spectrum Commission (IMSC) means the existing entity created by the MSWG in 2020 to fulfil certain functions as directed by MSWG , prior to the establishment of the MSE . Allocation of any new spectrum Refers to allocation of frequency ranges under a management right regime for the first time Renewal of existing spectrum Refers to reallocation of frequency ranges that have previously been allocated under a management right regime. Radio licence A license granted or deemed to have been granted under Part 13 of the Radiocommunications Act 1989 Spectrum licence means a licence created under Part 6 o f the Radiocommunications Act 1989 Commercial Spectrum Spectrum that has been identified for allocation to anyone other than the Crown, in the form of Management Rights. New Zealand Radio Sector Group An industry group, convened by MBIE, that is consulted before MBIE determines New Zealand’s position in international negotiations on spectrum matters.
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum Page 12 22. Signatories
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum Page 13
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum Page 14 Appendix A: Historical background of r adio s pectrum In 1984 , the first claims by Māori to radio spectrum arose when Māori sought to secure the third national television channel warrant. This bid, without financial backing, failed , and New Zealand’s last VHF television network passed into private hands. In 1986, the Waitangi Tribunal in the Te Reo Māori claim (W ai 11) found that broadcasting was one way for the Crown to fulfill its obligations under the Treaty to protect and promote te reo Māori as a taong a. Those findings were accepted by the Crown. In 1987 , Māori -language radio stations began broadcasting. In 1989 , a Radiocommunications Bill was introduced that had no specific spectrum provisions to address Māori broadcasting. Te Reo Māori claimants remai ned concerned about the Crown's ability to promote Māori language through broadcasting and about limited Māori access to broadcasting. However, the first spectrum auction saw a block of frequencies retained to meet future requirements for non -commercial br oadcasting and the promotion of Māori language and culture. In 1990 a second spectrum auction was called for AM and FM radio broadcasting licences. This led to a request for an urgent hearing by the Waitangi Tribunal of two claims before it. The claimants maintained that the number of frequencies the Government proposed to reserve for promotion of Māori language and culture through broadcasting were inadequate. The Tribunal recommended postponement of the auction, but this was refused by the Government. This eventually went to the Court of Appeal where most of the Court found that the Minister could not reasonably have decided to proceed with the auction without first awaiting the report of the Waitangi Tribunal. When the auction eventually proceeded, further FM frequencies were reserved nationwide for promotion of Māori language and culture. In the 1990s, the Government proceeded with plans to sell state -owned broadcasting assets. Māori took the Crown to court to halt these sales. Although their attempts fa iled, they continued to appeal through the courts and eventually went to the Privy Council in England. The Privy Council recognised that the language was in a ‘vulnerable state’ and that the Crown would need to ‘take especially vigorous action for its protection’. Because of this the Crown amended the Broadcasting Act in 1993 and established Te Māngai Pāho, the Māori language and culture broadcasting funding agency. From 1996, blocks of 3G spectrum in the 2 GHz band were proposed for auction. Three years o f unsuccessful negotiations led the late Rangiaho Everton, on behalf of all Māori, to make a claim (Wai 776) to the Waitangi Tribunal which sought allocations in line with previous Government decisions. The Waitangi Tribunal found in favour of the 3G spect rum claim, but the Government declined to accept its recommendations, and proceeded with auctions. Following the 3G auction, the Government established Te Huarahi Tika Trust in 2000, and allocated it $5 million to promote Māori participation in ICT. Te Hu arahi Tika Trust had by 2008 succeeded in securing a 20% shareholding in what is now 2 degrees. This supported the arrival of a third telco in Aotearoa and increased competition in the market. In 2009, Māori again contested the sale of 4G spectrum, and again their claims were rejected by the Government. Following the 4G auction in 2013, another fund of $30 million was allocated to support initiatives that create high value jobs and opportunities to advance Māori in digital technologies . This fund, calle d the Ka Hao Fund, is administered by Te Puni Kōkiri. In 2020 Māori agreed to early allocation of 5G spectrum in good faith and to maintain positive Māori - Crown relationships through to an enduring agreement on spectrum issues and beyond. As the planned long -term auction of 5G spectrum looms, Māori claims to spectrum remain unresolved. Māori maintain their views: that a taonga is anything highly valued by iwi; taonga , the word used in Article Two of the Treaty of Waitangi, applies to tangible or intangibl e things; and the spectrum is a
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum Page 15 taonga of high value, and is of high value to iwi. Māori and the Crown have never reached agreement on this point. Appendix B: Process for f uture spectrum transfers and renewals Spectrum identified in the MOU will be transferred to the MSE through a Management Right Agreement, at no cost. Ownership of a Management Right gives the ability to grant spectrum licences within a particular frequency range . The Crown sometimes sells Management Rights to third parties. Those r ights are particularly useful to companies that wish to operate national networks but may also be used to create a set of regional operations . In the future, if the Management Rights regime is replaced by an alternative, then the principles in this MOU wi ll apply. ‘Overs and unders’ mechanism As per clause 9 above , the Crown will allocate to the MSE, to be held for the benefit of all Māori, at no cost, 20% of all future C ommercial Spectrum allocations. Spectrum availability and technical constraints mean that it will not always be practical to allocate exactly 20% of any particular spectrum allocation. For example, some technologies operate in 10 MHz increments. If, say, 170 MHz is available then allo cating 20% would result in wasted spectrum. That is 180 x 20% = 36 MHz but only 30 MHz would be usable. In situations where the spectrum technical limitations make it impractical to split the spectrum into the agreed percentage, a percentage above or belo w the agreed percentage may be necessary. If this happens, the Crown and the Māori Spectrum Entity will discuss the situation before making allocation decisions. The Crown will decide an allocation amount under or over the agreed percentage of, considering the MSE’s preference and the most efficient use of the band. Over time, the parties intend for all allocations under this M OU to average out at the agreed percentage [20%] . This long term average will be weighted to reflect the relative valuati ons of di fferent frequencies. That is, 50 MHz in the UHF band is much more valuable than 50 M Hz of millimetre wave spectrum. The Crown and MSE will engage in good faith to agree how to reflect different valuation and tracking of ‘overs and unders’. For avoidance of doubt, neither party will attempt to use the ‘overs and unders’ mechanism to reduce or increase the total value of the spectrum being allocated to the Māori Spectrum Entity. Application to renewals and other Management Rights Returned or expired spec trum rights that are allocated through the management right regime will be treated as a new allocation and will be in scope of the agreed formula. Other spectrum -related matters The position of the Management Right within the band will be determined by the Crown following discussion with the MSE. If the Crown is planning a sale of rights, the MSE may choose to have the allocated spectrum asset realised in the form of revenue, in which case, MBIE would sell any spectrum on behalf of the MSE as part of the wi der allocation process. MSE spectrum will not be subject to implementation requirements or spectrum caps that may be imposed in other spectrum within the same band. MSE spectrum will be subject to the same technical requirements as other occupants of the band. The MSE will have membership in the New Zealand Radio Sector Group . The MSE will be invited to participate in technical working groups and on matters of detail, noting conflicts of interest between
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum Page 16 the governance and operational parts of the entity and subject to any confidentiality deeds to be signed. The MSE will be invited to participate in working groups that determine New Zealand’s position to international spectrum meetings and will have the option to have MSE representation in the New Zealand delegation.
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum Page 17 Appendix C: Initial s pectrum allocation s to the Māori Spectrum Entity Management Rights to be transferred The following Management Rights will be made available for the use of the IMSC and ownership transferred to the Māori Spectrum Entity on its establishment. Band name Frequency range Commencement date
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum Page 18 Appendix D: Operational processes for working together on spectrum policy
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum Page 19 Subject to clause 1 7 above, t he parties agree the following information will not be shared by the Crown to the MSWG/MSE , unless to the extent it is otherwise publicly available : • Advice on issues that the Māori spectrum entity has not flagged interest in • Advice that the Minister has requested in confidence • Aide memoires (no new decisions) • Speech notes • Event briefings • Spectrum valuations , prior to a commercial allocation process • Commercial documents from other MNOs/spectrum operators
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum Page 2 CONTENTS
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum Page 20 Signed in the presence of:
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum Page 3 1. The Parties The Parties to this Memorandum of Understanding are: Party A: The Māori Spectrum Working Group (MSWG) compris ing: • Nga Kaiwhakapūmau i Te Reo (WAI2224 claimant) , represented by Piripi Walker and Andrew Robb • New Zealand Māori Council (WAI2224 claimant) represented by Peter Fraser • Te Huarahi Tika Trust represented by Daphne Luke • National Iwi Chairs Forum represented by Haami Piripi • Māori telecommunications and technology industry representatives Antony Royal and Robyn Kamira Through Waitangi Tribunal claims hui and subsequent hui, the MSWG is mandate d to work with the Crown towards an enduring agreement for the allocation and managem ent of spectrum and resources for Māori . This MOU is signed by Piripi Walker, Haami Piripi, Peter Fraser, Daphne Luke, Robyn Kamira, and Antony Royal on behalf of the MSWG. Party B: The Crown The Crown is represented by Ministers acting under authority de legated by Cabinet. The Crown agencies operate within the mandate provided by legislation, Government policy as set by Cabinet, and the direction of their respective Ministers: • Minister for the Digital Economy and Communications – The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment • Minister for Māori Development – Te Puni Kōkiri • Minister of Finance – The Treasury The Crown manages spectrum on behalf of all New Zealanders. This role is enabled by the Radiocommunications Act 1989 and includes consideration of fairness, certainty, dispute resolution, future and current needs. The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) is responsible for the regulation, administration, and investigation of radio spectrum in Aotearoa New Zealand. This MOU is signed by Hon Dr David Clark; Minister for the Digital Economy and Communications, Hon Grant Robertson; Minister of Finance ; Hon Wil lie Jackson; Minister for Māori Development on behalf of the Crown.
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum Page 4 a) spectrum is a taonga as per Ko te tuarua ( Article 2) in Te Tiriti o Waitangi and as affirmed by the Waitangi Tribunal in 1999 on the W ai 776 claim. b) spectrum is a means to achieve rangatiratanga and broad regional, economic, cultural , environmental and so cial outcomes that are enabled by greater Māori participation in, a nd benefit from digital technologies. c) Māori have already added significant and tangible value to the New Zealand economy as a result of participation in the telecommunications sector. 4) The Crown does not accept the conclusions and recommendations of the W ai 776 report, and in particular does not accept that radio spectrum is a taonga. 5) Māori and the Crown have engaged in good faith to attempt to address Māori interests in spectrum. More recently: a) The Government’s recent preparations for the 3.5 GHz band spectrum allocations sparked renewed Crown focus on Māori interests in spectrum, and i n May 2019, Māori and Crown formed a joint working group to develop options for an enduring agreement to address Māori interests in spectrum. b) In December 2019, an agreement was reached for an allocation of 3.5 GHz spectrum to Māori as part of a short- term allocation of spectrum for 5G. Crown funding was also pledged for a Māori led programme of work to build capability and technical expertise in spectrum -related activities, and to support broad engagement with Māori as a step towards an enduring agreement between Māori and the Crown. c) A total of $1.15 million funding was provided from Te Puni Kōkiri (TPK) and MBIE baselines and the Ka Hao fund in 2020, and a subsequent $2 million from TPK was provided in 2021. $5.8 million was committed for this work in Budget 2021. 6) The Crown and MSWG are now pursuing an outcomes -based engagement. 7) The MSWG and the Cr own are committed to reaching an enduring agreement on Māori interests in radio spectrum. 8) Both parties are committed to growth and shared prosperity by supporting Māori to improve regional, economic, cultural , environmental and so cial outcomes . 9) Māori and the Crown agree that the growth and extension of Māori led initiatives hold the key to a long -lasting step -change in Māori participation in the digital economy. 10) The Parties believe that what is set out in this MOU will achieve the shared Māori -Crown objecti ves set out below; while acknowledging there remain some areas where Māori -Crown views differ.
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum Page 5 The Māori Spectrum Working Group commit s to: 1) working alongside Iwi/Māori to create a permanent entity that leverages the radio spectrum to support Māori regional, economic, cultural , environmental and so cial wellbeing. 2) fulfilling its role of managing the radio spectrum allocated to it on behalf of Mā ori. This role involves ensuring that: a) spectrum is used efficiently and fairly for a range of commercial, non -commercial and public good purposes b) users of spectrum have certainty about their rights and obligations c) spectrum use is monitored so that legitima te usage rights and obligations are maintained and enforced d) disputes between different spectrum users are resolved fairly, and e) future spectrum needs are accommodated The Crown commits to: 1) fulfilling its stewardship role of managing the radio spectrum on be half of all New Zealanders. This role involves ensuring that: a) spectrum is used efficiently and fairly for a range of commercial, non -commercial and public good purposes b) users of spectrum have certainty about their rights and obligations c) spectrum use is mon itored so that legitimate usage rights and obligations are maintained and enforced d) disputes between different spectrum users are resolved fairly, and e) future spectrum needs are accommodated
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum Page 6 6. The new Māori Spectrum Entity 1) The new Māori Spectrum Entity to be established, will seek to build its internal capability to ensure it effectively performs its roles with the view to serving Māori interests and opportunities in spectrum, is sustainable, and is immediately active in the telecommunication sector and industry. 2) This will be done through connecti ng Government initiatives and programmes to the MSE and/ or by jointly developing initiatives. 3) Joint a spirations for the MSE will include the following : a) be an influential and a significant participant in the teleco mmunications sector ; and b) enable Māori participation and development in the telecommunications sector by: i) helping to create a pipeline of skills and capability for Māori , ii) helping to provide opportunit ies for jobs, businesses, innovation and partnering in spectrum -related activities.
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum Page 7 2) We will operate a no surprises approach to the sha ring of information under this M OU, subject to any legal constraints.
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum Page 8 11. Tahua Tautoko (accelerated industry investment initiative) 1) The p urpose of Tahua Tautoko is to a ccelerate Māori participation into the telecommunications and technology sector via the MS E to create a direct and dedicated gateway for Māori training, jobs, business and leadership pipelines . 2) The criteria that the parties to this M OU will use to evaluate the business case for Tahua Tautoko are: a) Generates steady & significant revenue; b) Gives access to assets, expertise, infrastructure and capital; c) Enables significant influence in the industry (credibility, commercially strong) enabling leverage to enter quality partnerships; d) Strategically aligned with government strategies – e.g. economic, digital, telecommunications strategies ; e) Seeks to achieve the shared objectives of this M OU (refer clause 3 ). 3) The Crown has agreed to set aside funds (refer clause 10 ) for this initiative, subject to the development of one or more proposals that (a) seek to achieve the purpose and any agreed criteria , and (b) are agreed by Ministers and MSWG/MSE . 4) The parties acknowledge there will be further discussions on the criteria and how this initiative will work in practice. MBIE commits to working with MSWG/MSE on the development of the Tahua Tautoko criteria and proposal(s) . 5) Reviews of progress under clause 18 of this MOU will include a review of progress on the purpose and criteria for Tahua Tautoko as set out in this clause.
Memorandum of Understanding on Radio Spectrum Page 9 14. Statutory and c ontractual obligations 1) The parties acknowledge that MBIE is a Government department and that this MOU will not require MBIE to act in any way contrary to its obligations pursuant to Ministerial or Cabinet direction, or under its statutory responsibilities, or pursuant to any contractual obligations it has established with othe r parties. 2) The MSWG acknowledge the Crown’s obligation to act in the best interests of the public including Iwi, and Māori and other citizens by maximising the amount of spectrum available for the social and economic benefit of all. 3) This means that MSWG wi ll not seek to limit Crown spectrum allocations or influence the price that the Crown puts on its spectrum allocations. 4) Both parties acknowledge the requirements of the Commerce Act 1986 , and will not act in an anti-competitive manner.
Memorandum of arrangement relating to science and research cooperation between MBIE and the Chinese Academy of Sciences [PDF 273KB]
Memorandum of cooperation between MBIE and the National Natural Science Foundation of China [PDF 5.1MB]
Memorandum of understanding
Metadata in Green OA repositories must include the project ID, list MBIE as a funding source, and contain a permanent DOI (or URL if no DOI is available) for the published version. Metadata should also contain other relevant information as applicable and appropriate including, but not limited to: author(s)/creator(s); title; publisher; date of publication; volume, issue, and page numbers; ISBN/ISSN/other standard number; licence associated with an item; and the ORCID identifier for the author.
Methane is a potent greenhouse gas that contributes significantly to the amount of warming that we are experiencing. New Zealand is participating in the MethaneSAT space mission as part of the global effort to combat climate change.
MethaneSAT is a state-of-the-art satellite designed to detect global methane emissions with unprecedented accuracy. The MethaneSAT satellite is unique because it can measure over a large area and focus on specific targets.
Michael has built up his mechanic business over 30 years. His employees are like family.
Microbes and their environments (BIOL234)
Mid-point review of the phase-out of the Low Fixed Charge (LFC) Regulations
Migrant Employment Data is released quarterly. The data has a lag of approximately 3 months (so for example the data released in September 2021 would be current to June 2021). We currently distribute this data through 2 different channels:
Migrant Exploitation Protection Visa (MEPV) established on 1 July 2021, with 61 applications accepted, 56 approved and 2 declined (withdrawn) as at 1 Dec 2021.
Migrant Survey 2023 report
Migrant Survey 2023 report [PDF 632KB]
Migrant Trends 2016-2017 is the 17th in an annual report series examining trends in temporary and permanent migration to and from New Zealand.
Migrant Worker Protection bill introduced, to give effect to legislative changes proposed under the Temporary Migrant Worker Exploitation Review
Migrant Youth - a statistical profile of recently arrived young migrants
Migrant Youth Information Project
Migrant Youth: A statistical profile of recently arrived young migrants
Migrant Youth: a statisical profile of recently arrived young migrants
Migrant and community experience of migration
Migrant exploitation protection visa
Migrant worker protection bill introduced, to give effect to legislative changes proposed under the Temporary Migrant Worker Exploitation Review
Migrants from Fiji (40%) and Samoa (31%) make up the majority of those approved.
Migrants from Fiji (70%) made up the majority, followed by Tonga (23%).
Migrants from Fiji made up the majority of those approved (65%).
Migrants from Fiji made up the majority of those approved (93%).
Migrants were more likely to be working as Technicians and Trades Workers (71%).
Migrants who don't hold any visa to be in New Zealand are even more vulnerable. These migrants are less likely to be aware of their rights and entitlements than their New Zealand colleagues.
Migrants' settlement experiences and community attitudes
Migrants' settlement experiences and community attitudes toward migrants and immigration
Migration Trends and Outlook 2016/17
Migration data explorer (MDE)
Migration research and evaluation
Migration trends data explorer
Migration trends of migrants from the Pacific over the last 5 years using Immigration New Zealand data
Mike is the founder of a number of startups, including Sonar6 and Joyous. He is a published author in marketing, employee experience, and the software industry, and a past winner of the Bayer Innovators Award. He is regarded as an expert in Softwareas a Service business models and technology marketing. He holds board and advisory board roles in various technology companies ranging from investor-led early stage through to established public companies.
Mikhael Sayat on helping to create the next generation of space-based computers
Miles Holden, Moeraki, Otago
Milestone reached for fixing the Holidays Act 2003
Milford Opportunities Project
Milford Opportunities project
Minerals Strategy for New Zealand and Critical Minerals List launched
Minerals and petroleum consultations and reviews
Minerals and petroleum strategies for New Zealand
Minimum Wage Order 2024 [PDF 236KB]
Minimum Wage Order 2025 [PDF 257KB]
Minimum Wage Review 2022 [PDF 2.4MB]
Minimum Wage Review 2023 [PDF 1.3MB]
Minimum Wage Review 2024 [PDF 1.1MB]
Minimum Wage Review 2024: Setting the 2025 rates [PDF 374KB]
Minimum and maximum liable earnings
Minimum delivery frequency
Minimum number of delivery points in total
Minimum wage 2016 Cabinet paper
Minimum wage 2016 regulatory impact statement
Minimum wage 2017 Cabinet paper
Minimum wage 2017 regulatory impact statement
Minimum wage 2018 Cabinet paper
Minimum wage 2018 regulatory impact statement
Minimum wage 2019 Cabinet paper
Minimum wage 2019 regulatory impact statement
Minimum wage 2020 Cabinet paper
Minimum wage 2020 regulatory impact statement
Minimum wage 2021 Cabinet paper
Minimum wage review 2021 [PDF 1.8MB]
Minimum wage review, December 2019
Minimum wage review, December 2020
Minimum wage review, November 2018
Minister Responsible for the GCSB and NZSIS advised of national security risks:
Minister approval sought:
Minister for Building and Construction
Minister for Economic Growth
Minister for Infrastructure
Minister for Media and Communications
Minister for Regional Development
Minister for Small Business and Manufacturing
Minister for Social Development and Employment
Minister for Tourism and Hospitality
Minister for Trade and Investment
Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety
Minister for the Public Service
Minister for the South Island
Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs
Minister of Science, Innovation and Technology
Minister response to consultation on Holidays Act replacement
Ministerial Direction to Callaghan Innovation on the administration of a RDTI transitional support mechanism [PDF 885KB]
Ministerial decisions informing national interest considerations
Ministers representing various other portfolios, senior officials and members of various APEC forums meet throughout the year to launch new initiatives, track the progress of existing programmes and implement directives from the leaders. New Zealand has hosted APEC twice, in 1999 and 2021 (the first ever fully-virtual APEC).
Minister’s office to complete:
Ministry for Culture & Heritage
Ministry for Culture and Heritage
Ministry for Ethnic Communities
Ministry for Pacific Peoples
Ministry for Pacific Peoples; and
Ministry for Primary Industries
Ministry for Primary Industries (MPI)
Ministry for the Environment
Ministry for the Environment (MfE)
Ministry of Business, Innovation & Employment
Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment
Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE)
Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) Hīkina Whakatutuki – Lifting to make successful
Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE), Department of Internal Affairs (DIA), New Zealand Police (NZP), Oranga Tamariki (OT)
Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE), Department of Internal Affairs (DIA), New Zealand Police (NZP), Oranga Tamariki (OT), New Zealand Customs Service (NZCS)
Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, Long-term Insights Briefing 2022
Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment;
Ministry of Business, Innovation, and Employment
Ministry of Culture and Heritage
Ministry of Defence (MoD)
Ministry of Disabled People
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade (MFAT)
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade;
Ministry of Housing and Urban Development
Ministry of Justice to further develop the training framework for Communication Assistants and raise awareness to lawyers and police prosecutors of the Communication Assistance service.
Ministry of Pacific Peoples
Ministry of Primary Industries
Ministry of Primary Industries (MPI)
Ministry of Social Development
Ministry of Social Development;
Ministry of Transport (MoT)
Minute of Decision for the Cabinet Business Committee on setting average levy rates for 2025/26, 2026/27, and 2027/28.
Minute of Decision for the Cabinet Economic Policy Committee on publicly consulting on proposed levy rates for 2025/26, 2026/27, and 2027/28.
Minutes of the Expert Reference Group [PDF 2.9MB]
Mission Operations Control Centre (MOCC)
Mission operations, machine learning and donut catchups
Mitigating risk of technology and service failure
Mitigation & Adaptation to Climate Change
MoE intends to consult Education Payroll Limited (EPL) on the proposed changes .
MoJ to consider amending the Crimes Act 1961 to strengthen provisions for the criminalisation of trafficking in children. If the opportunity arises the Ministry will endeavour to progress this work.
MoT develops policy and regulations for transport, including emerging aviation technologies.
Mobile coverage currently covers areas where over 95% of New Zealanders live and work. However, our geographic coverage was sitting at around 50%.
Modelled Territorial Authority GDP
Modelled Territorial Authority Gross Domestic Product
Modelling and forecasting
Modern slavery and worker exploitation
Modernising parental leave
Modernising parental leave regulatory impact statement
Module 1: Understanding interpreting
Module 2: How public servants can access interpreting services
Module 3: How to communicate effectively using an interpreter
Monday to Friday, 8am to 8pm
Monitoring arrangements for MBIE-monitored Crown entities
Monitoring energy use to create a sustainable eco-community
Monitoring of 2016 changes to the Residential Tenancies Act
Monitoring the Commerce Commission
Monitoring the petrol excise duty reduction
Monitors compliance with the policy on a regular basis
Monopsony in the New Zealand labour market [PDF 1.1MB]
Monthly Regional Tourism Estimates (MRTEs)
Monthly Regional Tourism Estimates (MRTEs, 2016-2020)
Monthly labour market fact sheet
Monthly unique regional population estimates (MURPEs)
Mood of the Nation survey on the Tourism Industry website
More and better research fellowships
More broadly, companies can take steps now to mitigate security risks. Recently released guidance on how to protect critical assets is available to support the industry to keep themselves safe.
More detail on these proposals and detailed recommendations for your consideration are provided in Annex Two .
More details on the Great Rides and Heartland Rides, including location, grading, and service providers can be found on the New Zealand Cycle Trail website.
More flexible dismissal process for high-income employees
More granular tools would be required to fully assess the implications associated with each of the scenarios, from the capital investment required to grow dairy production, through to the research and marketing development required to build export premiums, and the detailed energy analysis needed to assess the biomass requirements to meet the expected primary and final energy supply requirements.
More information about eligibility, approved research providers, record keeping obligations and in-year payments can be found
More information about the Amendment Act on the Parliament website
More information about the IDI
More information about the Regional events fund
More information about the minimum wage
More information can be found here:
More information can be found on scams including the types of scams, and how to report and avoid them here:
More information can be found on the Employment New Zealand website.
More information can be found on the Immigration New Zealand website.
More information is available on our ANZSRC page on this website
More information on New Zealand standards is available on the Standards New Zealand website.
More information on child labour exploitation among migrants, international students, refugees
More information on foundational projects
More information on our privacy statement
More information on the rebate, including the criteria and application process, is available at:
More information on the review process
More information on these arrangements is available on the
More information on wage rates
More information on what is needed to certify your vehicle, and where to go to get certified, is available on the Plumbers, Gasfitters and Drainlayers Board website:
More sick leave to support employees on the way
More wind and solar generation needed to meet future demand
Most Pacific Essential Skills workers were in their 20s and 30s and more likely to be male.
Most attention on emissions and climate change mitigation to date has focused on the role of energy (largely scope 1 and 2 emissions). However, increasing attention is being paid to material and wider supply chain related emissions (scope 3). A shift to a circular economy is a key part of reducing scope 3 emissions in material production and supply chains.
Most businesses pay their ACC levy invoice annually in a single payment. However, ACC also offers a range of instalment plan options to pay, including a 3, 6, or 10-month instalment plan. Historically, ACC has required some businesses that use an instalment plan to pay debit interest on levies remaining outstanding. It continues to do so for those using a 10-month instalment plan currently.
Most changes take effect on Monday 6 May 2019.
Most gained residence through the Talent (Accredited Employer) visa category.
Most general lender responsibilities will apply without modification, including assisting borrowers to make informed decisions, and treating them reasonably and ethically.
Most migrants (80%) under this visa stream were approved through the Skilled Migrant Category.
Most of our NCPs are part-time in the NCP role, so be aware that you may not always get an immediate response.
Most of the information we collect is provided directly by people or entities, or an authorised representative, as a requirement to fulfil statutory obligations and according to our powers as a regulator.
Most other forms of government support are not affected
Most substantive feedback related to education and employment inclusion, to improve pathways to sustained employment for disabled young people.
Most temporary work visa migrants from the Pacific transition to residence through the Family visa stream
Most were in the 20 to 39 age group and the majority (89%) were males.
Most workers will be covered by income insurance
Motivation to contribute to NASA and the New Zealand space sector.
Motor Vehicles Disputes Tribunal
Motu Economic and Public Policy Research was commissioned to deliver research on the long-term settlement outcomes for Pacific migrants in New Zealand.
Mount Campbell Connect Limited
Mr Hiroshi Kikuchi, Commissioner, The Immigration Services Agency of Japan
Mutual recognition arrangements
My research portfolio is expanding into a thoroughly new area. My expertise in telescope operation, control and use for astronomical research, coupled with broader research into small satellite mission design for science projects, has widened my field of operations into space science and engineering; a significant rescoping of my career path.
My vision for tourism is for New Zealand-Aotearoa to be rated one of the top three aspirational tourism destinations in the world by the most discerning travellers.
NAATI and recertification
NAATI will process your application. This may take a few days, so it is recommended you get your application submitted by 23 June 2025 at the latest.
NASA Balloon Team Sets Up For Around-The-World Test Flight From New Zealand
NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) 2021 Intern
NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) 2022 Intern
NASA internships and New Zealand Space Agency scholarships
NASA's super-pressure balloon programme launching from Wanaka in the South Island.
NESTF information on the Minitry for the Environment website
NOTE: If a final report has not been received for an event which received funding in Round 1, that event will not be considered for Round 2 funding.
NZ Bioforestry sought to understand and contextualise the role and shift of the Forestry and Wood processing sectors towards low emissions: generating economic growth through sustainable forestry methods and diversifying and elevating the forestry workforce.
NZ Certificate in Composites
NZ Certificate in Engineering (Electrical)
NZ Certificate in Engineering Fabrication (Electrical)
NZ Certificate in Engineering Fabrication (Mechanical or Electrical)
NZ Certificate in Engineering Fabrication (Mechanical)
NZ Diploma in Engineering (Electrical)
NZ Diploma in Engineering (Mechanical or Electrical)
NZ Diploma in Engineering (Mechanical)
NZ Diploma/Certificate in Engineering (Electrical)
NZ Government Procurement
NZ Government Procurement and Property
NZ Industrial Relations Foundation
NZ Nuclear Free Zone, Disarmament and Arms Control Act 1987
NZ Petroleum and Minerals Website
NZ Police (NZP) and OT Specialist Child Interviewers continued to hold consultations to strengthen techniques and skills when interviewing child victims.
NZ Post Deed of Understanding - 2010 variation [PDF 99KB]
NZ Post Deed of Understanding - 2013 variation [PDF 651KB]
NZ Post Deed of Understanding 1998 [PDF 18KB]
NZ Post discussion document [PDF 1018KB]
NZ Post shall not re-introduce the rural delivery fee.
NZ Space Policy Review Consultation (closed)
NZ and Colorado to cooperate on aerospace, tech sectors
NZ is co-chairing the Counter-Terrorism and Transnational Crime work-stream under the ASEAN Regional Forum until 2023.
NZ population 4.9 million - half a million increase in the last six years
NZBN (Department invoices)
NZCT Fund Expression of Interest Form 2025
NZCT funding and how to apply
NZCTU paper on Workforce Development and Future Resilience [PDF 275KB]
NZDF LEOLABS LeoLabs made several observations about liability and insurance including: • It has conducted a study on the likelihood and impact of collisions in space, and highlighted these risks were increasing, as more and more satellites are launched into space. At the mome nt, there is no accepted liability chain for a collision in space, but it is clear that the Space Agency would be part of that chain if an incident were to occur. Whether or not the Space A gency is found to be liable would depend on the circumstances. The Review Team considers the provisions in the Act relating to indemnity and insurance give the necessary tools to appropriately manage liability. We do note that some jurisdictions provide an indemnity for operators for loss or damage above a specified amount. These indemnity provisions are intended to ensure that operators are not discouraged from conducting space activities by the potential for ve ry high losses if something goes wrong. We do not consider such a
NZEECS 2017-2022 - Unlocking our energy productivity and renewable potential
NZIER Report, November 2017
NZIIS Claimants will be offered support to get back to work
NZIIS Financial support is provided for most jobs losses
NZIIS Most workers will be covered by income insurance
NZIIS Our proposals at a glance
NZIIS The scheme will be managed by ACC, which will also collect the levy
NZRIS Indigenous Data Sovereignty Working Group
NZRIS Stewardship and Oversight Group
NZRIS Stewardship and Oversight Group (NSOG) terms of reference
NZRIS codesets Github page
NZRIS is a technology solution that will allow data to be held in one place and be presented in a way that is user-friendly and manageable.
NZRIS will help to create common data standards, reduce the reporting burden, simplify administration, and enable the re-use of data.
NZS 8200:2015 - Rainbow-inclusive workplaces: A standard for gender and sexual diversity in employment
NZSA Safety Case Guidance [PDF 932KB]
NZSA develops space policies that both supports the effective implementation of the Outer Space and High-altitude Activities Act 2017 and development of the sector.
NZSA leads on policies to develop the New Zealand space and high-altitude sector, attracting international companies to invest in New Zealand, and engaging on international science investment programmes.
NZSpaceTalk keeps you updated on developments in the sector - including new technologies, what NZ researchers and students are up to, and guest pieces from thought leaders and industry.
Narottam is completing a PhD in Electrical and Electronic Engineering at the University of Canterbury. His research looks at techniques for remotely tracking the orientation of spacecraft.
Natalie is an experienced airline pilot, flying Kiwis around the country and the world for 15 years.
National Action Plan 2018-2020
National Construction Pipeline Report
National Construction Pipeline Report 2024: Infographic
National Cyber Security Centre
National Emergency Management Agency
National Emergency and Management Agency
National Environmental Standards
National Environmental Standards for Telecommunications Facilities
National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research Limited (NIWA)
National Policy Statements
National Science Challenges
National Security Assessments
National Statement of Science Investment
National Survey of Employers
National Survey of Employment Intentions
National direction on greenhouse gas
National interest analysis: proposed accession to the Marrakesh Treaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works for Persons Who Are Blind, Visually Impaired, or Otherwise Print Disabled [PDF 341KB]
National interest considerations
National interest workstream
National interest, a final safeguard in the Act
National quarantine and isolation in the future
Natural gas production in New Zealand is expected to drop below demand, according to the latest oil and gas reserves data released by the Ministry of Business, Innovation & Employment (MBIE).
Negotiating alternative options with staff regarding flexible working arrangements where necessary.
Nelson Tasman Regional Workforce Plan
Nelson, Marlborough and Tasman Overview
Net increase over 3 years
Net inward migration continued to grow
Network of four INZ Irregular Migration Liaison Officers deployed full time to South and South-East Asia
Network operators in accordance with the Telecommunications Act 1987 and the Telecommunications Act 2001 are listed below in alphabetical order with their month of registration.
New Divisions have been created for Indigenous research in both the Socio-Economic Objectives (SEO) and Fields of Research (FoR) classifications. Indigenous research has been a focus of this review, involving significant engagement with Indigenous research communities in New Zealand and Australia. Indigenous research being classified appropriately will ensure that this important area of research is better recognised.
New Zealand - China Strategic Research Alliance 2025 Investment Round Contract Template
New Zealand - China Strategic Research Alliance 2025 Investment Round Proposal Template
New Zealand - Germany science and technology cooperation agreement [PDF 186KB]
New Zealand - Japan science and technology cooperation agreement [PDF 106KB]
New Zealand - Singapore Biotech in Future Food Research Programme Call for Proposals 2025
New Zealand Agreements with trade and labour components
New Zealand Airports Association
New Zealand Amazon Memorandum of Understanding
New Zealand Association to Horizon Europe: Negotiating mandate [PDF 350KB]
New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990
New Zealand Business Number (NZBN)
New Zealand Business Number (NZBN) levy A new NZBN levy of $12 .00 is proposed, to be paid annually by entities with their registration or annual return fee. This levy will recover the cost of operating and administering the NZBN register. The NZBN register was introduced by the New Zealand Business Number Act 2016 (NZBN Act) as a government initiative aimed at reducing costs for businesses that interact with government. An NZBN is a unique identifier with key information attached to it about a business that is searchable by the government, businesses, and the public . The NZBN enables government agencies to readily identify an organisation and coordinate their services to reduce the time businesses spend interacting with government. It also enables the creation of innovative private sector Government -to-Business (G2B) and Business -to-Business (B2B) services including supplying, tendering or contracting to government. Why entities are only now being charged a separate NZBN levy When the NZBN Act was implemented, the Companies Office automatically allocated an NZBN to all corporate bodies in New Zealand, including state sector entities, and those registered on a Companies Office entity register ( eg companies, incorporated societies and building societies).14 Government provided a level of funding to the Companies Office for several years to cover the costs of the NZBN and encourage these bodies and entities to register an NZBN. The funding recognised that entities and bodies may have been discouraged from firs t using an NZBN if they had to pay a fee for its introduction, limiting the uptake of obtaining an NZBN. Once the register was established it
New Zealand Certificate in Mechanical Engineering (Level 3, pre-apprenticeship)
New Zealand Certificate in Mechanical Engineering Level 3
New Zealand Claims Resolution Service
New Zealand Claims Resolution Service (NZCRS)
New Zealand Companies Office | Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment PO Box 1473, Wellington 6140, New Zealand www.mbie.govt.nz | www.companiesoffice.govt.nz 4 Contents How to have your say Contents ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................... 4 Purpose of this document ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................... 5 Overview ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .................. 6 Section 1: Summary of the review and proposals ................................ ................................ ................................ .............. 6 Section 2: Companies Office funding ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ . 10 Section 3: The basis for setting fees and levies ................................ ................................ ................................ ................. 16 Section 4: Current and proposed levies ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................ 20 Companies Office (CO) levy ................................ ................................ ................................ .............. 20 New Zealand Business Number (NZBN) levy ................................ ................................ .................... 22 Insolvency Practitioners (IP) levy ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 24 Section 5: Proposed fees and total charges for all registers ................................ ................................ ........................... 26 Index of registers ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................. 26 Companies ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 26 Personal Property Securities ................................ ................................ ................................ ............. 28 Disclose ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............. 29 Financial Statements ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................... 30 Financial Service Providers ................................ ................................ ................................ ............... 31 Incorporated Societies ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................... 31 Limited Partnerships ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................... 33 Building Societies, Friendly Societies and Credit Unions ................................ ................................ .. 35 Retirement Villages ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................... 37 Insolvency Practitioners ................................ ................................ ................................ .................... 39 Auditors ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............. 39 Appendix One: Summary of questions ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................. 41 Appendix Two: Summary of proposed fees and levies ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 42 Appendix Three: Forecast annual volumes by register to determine unit costs ................................ .......................... 45 Appendix Four: Summary of fees to be revoked and other minor changes ................................ ................................ 47
New Zealand Council of Trade Unions
New Zealand Customs Service
New Zealand Customs Service;
New Zealand Cycle Trail funding
New Zealand Cycle Trail website
New Zealand Cycle Trails Incorporated
New Zealand Defence Force (NZDF)
New Zealand Disability Strategy
New Zealand Document Exchange Ltd t/a DX Mail
New Zealand Embassy, Beijing, China
New Zealand Embassy, Washington D.C. USA
New Zealand Emissions Trading Scheme
New Zealand Energy Efficiency and Conservation Strategy
New Zealand Energy Quarterly
New Zealand Energy Strategy
New Zealand Events Association
New Zealand Film Commission
New Zealand Food Composition Database:
New Zealand Food Innovation Network website
New Zealand Food Safety Science and Research Centre
New Zealand Food Safety Science and Research Centre contract template
New Zealand Food Safety Science and Research Centre contract template explanatory note
New Zealand Forest Institute Limited
New Zealand Forest Research Institute Limited (trading as Scion)
New Zealand Forest Research Institute Ltd (Scion)
New Zealand Free Trade Agreements
New Zealand Government Procurement
New Zealand Government Procurement (NZGP)
New Zealand Government Procurement and Property
New Zealand Government Procurement and Property (NZGPP) is responsible for supporting the Chief Executive Carolyn Tremain in her role as
New Zealand Government Procurement and Property helps government agencies deliver better public services for better value.
New Zealand Government Procurement website.
New Zealand Growth Capital Partners (formerly NZVIF)
New Zealand Growth Capital Partners.
New Zealand Institute for Minerals to Materials Research
New Zealand Intelligence Community (NZIC)
New Zealand Legislation website
New Zealand Maori Tourism
New Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs & Trade
New Zealand Mission to the European Union
New Zealand Mission to the European Union, Brussels, Belgium
New Zealand Mussel export prices if we look at it by form, the live mussel, the price goes up frozen meat at $10 per kilo, powder has been declining over time but sitting around just over $40 per kilo and if we look at oil, it is sitting at around $2000 per kilo. We can see that we are certainly adding value with the oil.
New Zealand National Contact Point for responsible business conduct - OECD guidelines for multi-national enterprises
New Zealand Nuclear Free Peacemakers and Space for Peace Aotearoa
New Zealand Nurses Organisation
New Zealand Petroleum & Minerals
New Zealand Petroleum and Minerals has granted an offshore petroleum exploration permit after a court-ordered reconsideration and released the Block Offer 2020 Invitation for Bids for onshore petroleum exploration in Taranaki.
New Zealand Petroleum and Minerals website
New Zealand Police NEW ZEALAND POLICE This submission noted that MBIE, under the Crown Minerals Act, has the ability to grant non -interference zone (NIZ) permits for mining and oil exploration activities within the maritime spectrum. This provides for specific offences against the Act where vessels/persons enter a NIZ. The Police have suggested that a similar piece of legislation for the Act would be beneficial to ensure any vessels entering any exclusion zone are subject to specific legislation that can be use d for prosecution where breaches occur. REVIEW TEAM’S ANALYSIS AND RESPONSE In considering what has been proposed in this submission, there was a question of whether it would be consistent with New Zealand’s international obligations, recognising that the law of the sea provides only very limited exceptions to what we can do in waters that are not under our jurisdiction. The Review Team considers that such an amendment would be inconsistent with New Zealand’s international obligations under UNCLOS and rec ommends no change.
New Zealand Post is now a state-owned enterprise and is subject to a deed of understanding with the Government to cover its social, price and service commitments.
New Zealand Post's information disclosure requirements
New Zealand Post's main obligations under the current Deed are set out below.
New Zealand Prostitutes Collective
New Zealand Refugee Resettlement Strategy: Success indicators and measures outcomes update for 2017/18 [PDF 1015KB]
New Zealand Regional Fibre Group
New Zealand Registered Architects Board
New Zealand Relay Service website
New Zealand Relay website
New Zealand Research Information System
New Zealand Screen Production Grant: one-year review report
New Zealand Screen Production Rebate
New Zealand Sectors Dashboard
New Zealand Sectors Report 2014
New Zealand Sectors Report 2014 - full report
New Zealand Sign Language by location
New Zealand Smart Grid Forum
New Zealand Space Policy Review consultation (closed)
New Zealand Space Scholarship
New Zealand Space Sector: Its value, scope and structure
New Zealand Space and Advanced Aviation Economic Survey
New Zealand Space and Advanced Aviation Strategy
New Zealand Space and Advanced Aviation Strategy 2024 to 2030
New Zealand Space and Advanced Aviation Strategy 2024-2030
New Zealand Superannuation and Retirement Income Act 2001 (Part 4 and Schedule 6)
New Zealand Tourism Board
New Zealand Tourism Futures Taskforce
New Zealand Trade and Enterprise
New Zealand Trade and Enterprise (NZTE)
New Zealand Trade and Enterprise (NZTE) is New Zealand's international business development agency. Its role is to help New Zealand businesses grow bigger, better and faster in international markets.
New Zealand Trade and Enterprise (NZTE) will focus on driving export growth by facilitating trade and access to international markets and ensuring New Zealand businesses have the necessary support to expand their international reach.
New Zealand Traveller Declaration
New Zealand Treaties Online
New Zealand Visitor Activity Forecast
New Zealand adheres to the main international agreements that promote a peaceful, sustainable, safe and secure space environment.
New Zealand along with seven other nations helped craft the principles espoused in the Artemis Accords. These simple, universal principles will enable the next generation of international partnerships for the exploration of the Moon and beyond.
New Zealand and Germany enjoy a strong and long-standing research relationship, underpinned by the 1977 New Zealand-Germany Science and Technology Agreement. The agreement is administered by MBIE and the German Federal Ministry for Education and Research (BMBF). There are a range of current joint investments with Germany in the areas of green hydrogen, biomedical engineering, and space technologies.
New Zealand and the State of Colorado have signed a Memorandum of Cooperation, further strengthening relationships between the two regions.
New Zealand award notice data published by government agencies on the Government Electronic Tender Service (GETS).
New Zealand biomaterials are a key ingredient in a range of essential oils (often blended or added to a carrier oil). What can you do with essential oils? What are the things they flow into? They flow into a huge amount of thing in your house today. Things like aromatherapy, air freshener, cosmetics, candles, medicinal oil, skin health, perfume, food ingredient etc.
New Zealand company designs world-leading space radar structure
New Zealand consumer surveys
New Zealand cruise impact research
New Zealand data providers must be legal entities.
New Zealand energy sector greenhouse gas emissions
New Zealand experienced a net gain of 72,300 permanent and long-term migrants in 2016/17, which was 4.7% more than in 2015/16. This was the fifth consecutive year in which migration increased and the highest net gain ever recorded.
New Zealand experiences transformational change in national economic prosperity.
New Zealand firms: Reaching for the frontier 2020 [PDF 4.5MB]
New Zealand generally launches small satellites, and CubeSats in particular.
New Zealand generation stack updates
New Zealand government agencies signed up to telephone and video interpreting
New Zealand government agencies signed up to telephone and video interpreting, and the face to face interpreting panel.
New Zealand government procurement open data
New Zealand has 3 types of trade remedy action to deal with dumped or subsidised imported goods that could injure New Zealand manufacturers.
New Zealand has a strong interest in managing the SSA risks associated with payloads less than 1U. Encouraging trackability through our permitting regime demo nstrates New Zealand’s commitment to the responsible use of space and reflects the UN Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space’s ( COPUOS ) Guidelines on the Long Term Sustainability of Space ( LTS Guidelines ). These encourage regulators to promote the t rackability of space objects, regardless of their size or mission type. The application of this policy is intended to evolve to reflect the development of new technologies, changes in the satellite and broader space industry , and the orbital debris environ ment. 1.5 Information to be taken into account when applying this policy Relevant sections of the Act must be complied with. Other information that is to be taken into account in the application of this policy includes : + the applicant’s submitted orbital debris mitigation plan ; + any applicable technical advice, reports or assessments provided by other space agencies , regulators or experts ; + any overseas licence, permit or other authorisation relevant to the proposed activities .
New Zealand has a strong startup community that has shown impressive resilience in recent years and some early success. However, there is a greater opportunity to leverage our excellence in technology and innovation to create a world class innovation and knowledge intensive economy.
New Zealand has already launched payloads with national security applications, none of which have been assessed to be inconsistent with our national interests. Any application to launch a payload which is inconsistent with our domestic laws and policies and/or our international obligations, will not be progressed.
New Zealand has joined an international arrangement to co-operate with NASA on peaceful exploration and activity in outer space.
New Zealand has launched commercial payloads, such as those that have remote sensing capabilities, which are owned by the United States, France, Japan, and Singapore. Remote sensing includes observing the Earth from their respective satellites and providing these images to their customers. Payload missions that New Zealand has launched include satellites gaining real-time images and maritime traffic tracking.
New Zealand has legislation and policies in place to address domestic instances of slavey or forced labour. Our legislation includes the Immigration Act and Crimes Act, which have provisions to prevent domestic and transnational people trafficking and slavery. The Government Procurement Supplier Code of Conduct sets an expectation that suppliers monitor and address international human rights standards in their supply chains.
New Zealand has limited ability to influence design and manufacturing abroad. This makes strategic collaboration with trade partners on circular economy approaches important to mitigate risks of supply chain disruptions and market volatility. Aligning sustainability and circular economy strategies with each trading partner's specific policies and market conditions will be pivotal.
New Zealand has long been recognised as a great place to do business, regularly appearing as one of the top 10 countries to do business in reports from organisations like the World Bank and the Economist Intelligence Unit. New Zealand has a business-friendly taxation system that supports capital investment. The Research and Development (R&D) Tax Incentive supports R&D expenditure in New Zealand by providing a 15% tax credit on eligible R&D costs. We have close ties with global markets and free trade agreements with major trading partners.
New Zealand has multiple natural advantages which make it an ideal place to develop, test and operate space and advanced aviation technologies. Our uncrowded skies, coupled with our relatively low population density, means there is plenty of space for testing out innovative concepts in the air and on the ground. New Zealand is also a great location for Earth observation satellite calibration and validation and has a range of suitable sites for space and advanced aviation ground infrastructure.
New Zealand has mutual recognition arrangements with other economies. This allows exporters to have their conformity assessments in New Zealand recognised in overseas economies.
New Zealand has opened nominations for its candidate.
New Zealand has ratified, and is bound by many ILO Conventions.
New Zealand has shared in this growth and many of these challenges and opportunities are having an influence on our situation.
New Zealand has significant opportunities to produce added-value, bio-based products that utilise bio-waste streams, and reduce emissions and dependency on fossil fuels.
New Zealand has some of the largest selection of launch angles (azimuths) for rocket launches in the world. Our remote location is also an advantage, giving us clear skies and seas, and relatively low levels of air traffic.
New Zealand has strategic choices about what our biological resources are used for in the future. In making these choices, it will be important that New Zealand leverages the greatest value from our limited bioresources while ensuring their sustainability, maintaining the ecosystems that underpin them and reducing emissions.
New Zealand has the opportunity and the capability to become the most innovative and future focused tourism destination in the world. The Government will continue working with partners to lay the groundwork to affect real, systemic change as the tourism sector rebuilds.
New Zealand implements measures to meet its international commitments and prevent the conditions that enable forced labour, people trafficking and slavery. This includes meeting our commitments under the Forced Labour Protocol, which came into force for New Zealand in December 2020.
New Zealand in international communications forums and trade negotiations.
New Zealand is a founding member of APEC which promotes trade and economic growth in the Asia-Pacific region. APEC is of considerable economic and political significance to New Zealand.
New Zealand is a founding member of the ILO and has had a strong association with it throughout its history.
New Zealand is a founding member of the International Labour Organization (ILO) which is the key global labour body and source of international labour law.
New Zealand is a major food and beverage exporter, with the industry accounting for 46% of all goods and services exports.
New Zealand is a member of the International Energy Forum (IEF) and participates in several of its initiatives, including the Joint Oil Organisations Data Initiative and the International Energy Business Forum.
New Zealand is a regular participant in the IEF's bi-annual dialogue with energy ministers, and is a financial contributor to the IEF. We are also an active participant in the Joint Organisations Data Initiative.
New Zealand is almost alone in the developed world in not having some kind of mandatory, nationwide income insurance scheme or other protection, such as mandatory redundancy payments, for people who lose their jobs.
New Zealand is already a party to 4 United Nations space treaties:
New Zealand is also party to other international treaties that are relevant to space payloads, including treaties on disarmament, the environment and human rights. We reflect these international laws and governance arrangements in our domestic legislation and policies.
New Zealand is an associated country in Pillar 2 of Horizon Europe, the world's largest multilateral research and innovation programme. New Zealand-based researchers and organisations can join or lead Horizon Europe projects and receive funding on equal terms with their European counterparts.
New Zealand is an attractive place for space-related commerce.
New Zealand is at an early stage of the shift to a more circular economy; there is emergent activity in sustainable businesses and communities.
New Zealand is business friendly
New Zealand is committed to the safe, secure and responsible use of space. The Government is managing the risks posed by GBSI by introducing a bill in 2025 for a new regulatory regime covering new and existing infrastructure.
New Zealand is highly dependent on its biological resources to thrive and is not self-sufficient in these resources.
New Zealand is home to a thriving innovation ecosystem that encourages world-leading research and development (R&D) activity and resourceful ways of getting things done.
New Zealand is in the midst of a major upgrade of its telecommunication infrastructure:
New Zealand is on the path to a low emissions, climate resilient future. Government has set into law a target for net zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050 (other than for biogenic methane). The Emissions Reduction Plan is one mechanism we are using to focus our collective efforts toward transitioning to a more resilient, low emissions economy.
New Zealand is open for business
New Zealand is the ideal location for New Space
New Zealand is the ideal location for new space
New Zealand is well-known for developing creative solutions to problems. We are home to a thriving innovation ecosystem that encourages world-leading research and development activity. Our future-focused policy and regulatory settings make New Zealand an attractive location to develop new space and aviation products and ideas. New Zealand companies are transforming our access to space, developing new transportation solutions and applying aerospace-enabled data in new ways to solve problems and improve our daily lives.
New Zealand is widely regarded as one of the world's premier locations for screen production and post-production work.
New Zealand is widely regarded as one of the world's premier locations for screen production.
New Zealand lags behind the world on R&D spending. This Government has an ambitious target of increasing research and development expenditure to 2 percent of GDP by 2027.
New Zealand leads: Alex Semprini and Marina Dzhelali, Medical Research Institute of New Zealand (MIRNZ)
New Zealand leads: Professor Louise Parr-Brownlie, Departmental Science Advisor, MBIE and Dr Justin Dean, University of Auckland
New Zealand led a project through the HRDWG over 2021-22 examining how social dialogue can support resilience and responsiveness in times of crisis as well as for more long-term issues such as challenges posed by the future of work.
New Zealand offers many advantages to industry leaders, research institutions and innovative start-ups.
New Zealand payload permits by country
New Zealand produces 6 broad types of cosmetic products. To summarise at a high-level, these are face creams, face serums, scrubs/masks, body lotions, sunblock, and makeup.
New Zealand relay service
New Zealand research and development
New Zealand researchers create world-first stroke detection technology
New Zealand residents can be sex workers in New Zealand but can become liable for deportation if they invest in, are a director of, own or manage a commercial sex business.
New Zealand screen businesses are highly competitive internationally and globally recognised for their innovation and skill.
New Zealand seafood, so just touching on seafood to get a feel for what is in this document. New Zealand seafood has capabilities across the supply chain. We have got a strong and well-developed seafood, so wild catch and aquaculture industry with a large number of players.
New Zealand tertiary GIS papers, programmes and contacts
New Zealand uses around 11 million litres of diesel every day and while the chances of a severe and sustained fuel disruption are low, the consequences for Kiwis and the economy would be catastrophic.
New Zealand voluntarily took part in an APEC Fossil Fuel Subsidy Reform (FFSR) peer review in 2015 to identify inefficient fossil fuel subsidies leading to wasteful consumption.
New Zealand was invited by the European Union to consider joining the new partnerships being established under the 2nd Strategic Plan of Horizon Europe. The Government has elected to join two new co-fund partnerships
New Zealand will continue to advocate for effective international rules, norms and standards in space. New Zealand is party to the main international space treaties which are reflected in our domestic laws and policies. Although these international agreements provide the legal framework for space activity, the global space context has evolved in the decades since the agreements were reached, including through the growing number of countries and commercial operators active in space, the development of new space technologies and the rapid increase in the amount of space activity. New Zealand supports ongoing efforts to advance international agreement on norms, rules and principles of responsible behaviour in space.
New Zealand will have two targeted agencies to support economic growth through strong international connections in trade and investment.
New Zealand will need significantly more biomass for bioenergy production. Meeting that demand will require changes in land use, with associated impacts on other primary production.
New Zealand will require ongoing awareness of international circular economy developments to make timely responses to opportunities and risks. This includes keeping up with regulations, policies and strategies proposed by our major trading partners to ensure that our exporters can meet changing standards. Failure to comply with international standards and practices may mean reductions in market access, additional trade costs, or loss of competitive advantage.
New Zealand works to proactively identify victims and supports them to safety and recovery by putting their protection and needs at the heart of our responses.
New Zealand's 8 universities play a prominent role in the New Zealand research environment.
New Zealand's Energy Outlook
New Zealand's Horizon Europe National Contact Points
New Zealand's abundant and diverse energy resources have long underpinned our economy. The challenge is to meet New Zealand's energy needs in a way that supports our way of life, the economy and the environment.
New Zealand's contribution
New Zealand's economic context
New Zealand's future productivity to 2050: Consultation document [PDF 727KB]
New Zealand's gene technology rules are changing. Gene Technology is a powerful tool available to scientists, and recent improvements mean we can use it more precisely and safely than ever before. While gene technologies have been used in New Zealand for a long time, the current rules have not been updated to match the scientific advancements.
New Zealand's participation in ILO
New Zealand's participation in the International Energy Programme
New Zealand's postal market was opened to full competition in 1998. We are responsible for laws and regulations relating to postal services.
New Zealand-Aotearoa Government Tourism Strategy
New Zealand-Aotearoa Government Tourism Strategy Summary of consultation submissions [PDF 1.6MB]
New Zealand-Aotearoa Government Tourism Strategy [PDF 1.1MB]
New Zealand-Aotearoa Tourism Strategy
New Zealand-Aotearoa delivers exceptional visitor experiences
New Zealand-Aotearoa is a special place and visitors contribute significantly to our country.
New Zealand-China Strategic Research Alliance 2024 Call for Proposals
New Zealand-Malaysia Agreement on Labour Cooperation
New Zealand-Singapore Leveraging AI for Healthy Ageing 2025 Call for Proposals
New Zealanders' lives are improved by tourism
New accreditation and single work visa
New applied doctorates scheme
New blue warrants have not been available for freedom camping since 7 June 2024
New connectivity funding for more rural homes and businesses
New eligibility tests for Family Violence, Bereavement and Sick leave.
New employer accreditation and work visa
New gateway test for contracting arrangements
New government employment rule targeting quality employment outcomes for NZ workers came into force October 2021, supported by public guidance.
New leave payment formulas and definitions to provide greater clarity about what payments must be included in the calculations. This will include a new definition of gross earnings and a new Ordinary Leave Pay calculation to replace Ordinary Weekly Pay and Relevant Daily Pay.
New legislation to protect the public from wheel clampers charging excessive fees and preying on motorists is in effect from 2 January 2020.
New measures have come into force on 1 July 2021 to better protect migrants from exploitation.
New methods that employers must use to calculate the amount of leave entitlement an employee uses when they take leave. This will include a formula for calculating leave for employees with variable working arrangements.
New migrant exploitation phone line and online reporting established on 1 July, with 356 complaints of migrant exploitation received by 31 October, of which 103 found to potentially be exploitation and referred for investigation.
New migrant exploitation phone line and online reporting established on 1 July.
New pool safety legislation came into effect on 1 January 2017.
New social enterprise helping to democratise space
New social media platforms such as Instagram and TikTok appeal to most participants. Using short stories and reels to promote both the positive and negative impacts of financial capability was seen as an effective strategy for time-poor consumers.
New space payload principles protect the national interest
New standards and accreditation requirements from 1 July 2024
New standards and certification requirements
New student visa approval numbers fell slightly but remained high
New training modules on people trafficking completed by MBIE, and shared with NZP, OT, Customs and DIA. Specialised training for Airline Liaison Officers developed and rolled out. Police Specialist Child Protection Teams, all new detectives, and all District CIB Managers have received people trafficking training in 2021.
New work visa approvals grew 8% in 2016/17, which was the seventh consecutive year-on-year increase.
New, clearer requirements related to the process for having a closedown period.
Next steps for enabling more offshore renewable energy generation
Next steps for the RSE Review
Next steps on Industry Strategy
Next steps on Industry Strategy: Minute of Decision
Next, the Tourism Industry Transformation Plan will focus on addressing challenges and harnessing opportunities related to how the tourism industry interfaces with our natural environment.
Nga Haeranga NZ Cycle Trail Evaluation Report 2016 [PDF 4.8MB]
Nic Blakeley, Deputy Secretary, Labour, Science and Enterprise
Nic has also worked at Treasury in a range of policy areas, including a period as economic advisor to the Minister of Finance.
Nic joined MBIE in July 2023 from the Ministry of Social Development (MSD) where he held Deputy Chief Executive roles since 2013 in Social Policy, Strategy and Insights and most recently Transformation
Nimble, stable, and reputable government
No action Option One – Taskforce proposals Option Two – Accrual system Promotes purpose 0 + Better promotes work/life balance due to earlier and better access to leave + Better promotes work/life balance due to earlier and better access to leave Clarity and certainty 0 + Provides better prescription (e.g. how to determine a ‘week’ and ‘otherwise working day) and clarifies certain terms (e.g. ‘gross earnings’, ‘intermittent or irregular’) , but may remain hard for some employers and employees to understand entitlements ++ Provides better prescription (e.g. how to determine a ‘week’ and ‘otherwise working day) and clarifies certain terms (e.g. ‘gross earnings’, ‘i ntermittent or irregular’) Simpler 0 0 Provisions remain complex for employees with variable hours and/or remuneration + Annual holidays entitlements much simpler to calculate Implementable 0 + Greater prescription and rules improve implementability ; requires less upfront changes to payroll systems as it is an improved status quo, but annual holidays may be more difficult to calculate and compliance costs may be higher over time when compared to Option Two + Greater prescription and rules improve implementability ; requires more upfront changes to payroll systems, but annual holidays easier to calculate and compliance costs may be lower over time when compared to Option One Perverse incentives 0 + Removes perverse incentives around forms of payment (e.g. discretionary bonuses) and payment calculations (e.g. RDP vs. ADP) ; minimises incentives for employees to take holidays and leave on particular days (i.e. payments and deductions are well calibrated so employees are not incentivised to take time off on + Removes perverse incentives around forms of payment (e.g. discretionary bonuses) and payment calculations (e.g. RDP vs. ADP) ; minimises incentives for employees to take holidays and leave on particular days (i.e. payments and deductions are well calibrated so employees are not incentivised to take time off on 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:06:16
No more than 3% of total delivery points, subject to the condition that conversion of existing individual delivery points to communal delivery points may only occur with the written consent of the user.
No nominations are being sought in 2024.
No regulations were made as a result of this review. However on 24 May 2018 the Minister for the Community and Volunteer Sector announced a review of the Charities Act 2005. The Department of Internal Affairs is the lead agency. The scope of the review includes the regulation of third-party fundraisers.
No risk of introducing distortions to wider negotiations. × Employees are financially compensated for leave not taken but, as entitlement to time away from work must be reset, employees must wait to become entitled to time away from work again. 2. Improved MBIE guidance (same as option one) and legislative amendmen ts to clarify the legal status quo. Requires rescinding the Cabinet decision to accept the Taskforce’s recommendation.  Legislation provides clarity about legal requirements. × As above. × As above. 3. Legislative change that overrides the Holidays Act provisions and requires employers to automatically transfer employees’ leave entitlements if they negotiate for the employee to be offered the choice to transfer employment and the employee chooses to do so. Requires a minor adjustment/clarification to the current Cabinet decision, but it would be difficult to draft a legislative amendment to achieve this.  Legislation provides clarity about legal requirements.
No shop trading restrictions or restrictions on the sale of liquor will apply to this public holiday.
No. National security issues cannot be adequately addressed without an ability to prevent those who present a security risk from participating in a rocket launch industry. At the moment in the absence of a licencing regime there is limited ability to stop the launch of a space object. Safety risks can largely be managed under the Workplace Health and Safety Act, but frequent launches may also present features (likelihood of risk and consequences), which require additional obligations on the operator. Environmental risks can largely be managed under the RMA but novel environmental risk may arise (such as pollution in space) that are outside the jurisdiction of the RMA)No. There needs to be a legislative basis to transfer liability arising out of New Zealand’s international obligations to those who own/operate space objects. Legislative option (A)Yes. A new law will enable us to develop a regulatory regime that addresses our international obligationsYes. A new law will enable us to meet national security objectives. A new law will enable any emerging safety and environmental risks to be addressed through imposing licence conditions on the operator.Yes. A new law will contain provisions to transfer liability to those conducting rocket launches. 7yr8upqmdi 2016-06-08 10:27:02 s 6(a), s 9(2)(h) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Restricted Legislative option (B)While it is feasible to modify existing law, there are no advantages over standalone legislation and significant disadvantages. Significant amendments would be required to the scope, purpose and powers of these Acts before they could apply to rocket launches. For example, the Civil Aviation Act deals with a different context (although there are some minimum requirements for rocket launches in Part 101) and it is largely focused on safety not national security. The Defence Act also has a different purpose and would require significant amendments before it could apply to a commercial rocket launching area. Given the specific strategic role of the Defence Force, it is unlikely that the Defence Act is a suitable vehicle to regulate a commercial industry. 32. Our conclusion is that neither the status quo nor the non-regulatory option addresses all the problems that we need to address in order to enable space launches from New Zealand. Therefore legislation is required to meet our obligations and manage risks. Detailed content and design choices 3 3.The design of the legislation needs to address the problems that have been identified and the policy objectives set out in paragraph 27. 34. A set of principles to guide these decisions has been developed and agreed with the Minister for Economic Development. The principles are as follows: Minimum necessary, i.e. the legislation will contain the core elements required to achieve New Zealand’s policy objectives, and the rules and their enforcement will be proportionate to the benefits and risks expected to arise from the development of a New Zealand rocket industry. Certain and predictable , i.e. regulated entities have certainty as to their legal obligations and the regulatory regime provides, as far as possible, predictability over time. This is particularly relevant in a situation where Rocket Lab will transition from a contract with the Government to a regulatory regime for rocket launches. Flexible , i.e. a regime that is flexible enough to accommodate changes to the number of industry participants, launch locations and international obligations. Consistent with existing domestic law , i.e. there is a presumption that wherever possible the regulatory regime developed for rocket launch activities in New Zealand will maintain domestic law, including safety and environmental legislation, rather than seek to modify it. 35. We’ve also had regard to international practice. Specifically, the UN General Assembly Resolution 68/74 on recommendations relevant to the peaceful exploration and use of outer space. While we can deviate from that we could not then be sure that we were effectively meeting our international obligations. 36. Internationally, space launch legislation is based on a licensing or permitting regime that provides the necessary controls over participation in space launches including powers to prevent or stop launches. Licensing or permitting also enables liability to be transferred to where it can best be managed. 37. We’ve considered two approaches: A prescriptive approach with detailed provisions relating to the matters that we have identified above contained in the primary legislation, or a more permissive approach where the legislation sets up a decision- making framework that enables the decision-maker to address these decisions on a case-by-case basis. We’ve assessed these options against the principles as follows: Restricted 7yr8upqmdi 2016-06-08 10:27:02 Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Restricted Description of prescriptive approach 3 8.An example of a more prescriptive approach to space law is provided by Australia’s Space Activities Act 1998. While it provides for a decision-maker to issue a licence based on certain legislative criteria, it also contains in the primary legislation detailed provisions relating to liability, safety and accidents. 39. However, it is relevant to the consideration of the definition and consideration of this option that the Australian Government has just announced that the Act will be reviewed. The rationale for the review included the fact that space technologies have advanced significantly since the Act was introduced, and the need to ensure Australia’s civil space regulation effectively stimulates innovation and investment in this growing industry sector while effectively meet Australia’s international obligations in managing the space environment. 40. In commenting on the review, the chief executive of the Space Industries Association of Australia noted that the Space Activities Act was based on the outdated assumption that the Australian space sector would involve launch vehicles sending large satellites into space but satellites are becoming increasingly miniature, and that "The risk and liability assumptions that underpin the Act in its current form are acting as a brake on the development of a viable Australian space industry," Description of permissive approach 4 1.The permissive approach is based on giving a decision-maker (the responsible Minister) discretion to make the decision on whether or not to issue a licence and the conditions of such a licence, but balanced against and informed by specific objectives which are aligned with problems and objectives identified in this regulatory impact analysis. 42. There will need to be some prescription, as certain requirements in the TSA around safe and secure areas and accident zones are quite specific. There will also be regulation-making powers, as some matters may be more appropriate for Cabinet to decide, or there may be conditions that are common to all licencees or classes of licencee, and these could usefull be set out in regulation to provide certainty to licence applicants. 43. The key features of the permissive approach are as follows: Requirement for licence 44. All persons who launch or operate space objects will be required to have a licence which the responsible Minister may grant if the activities proposed to be undertaken are consistent with the purpose of the regime. A licence will authorise the launching of one or more space objects. 45. The Minister must not grant such a licence if: The grant of a licence would be inconsistent with New Zealand’s international obligations, or The Minister responsible for the New Zealand Security Intelligence Service certifies the grant of a licence would pose an undue risk to national security, or The Minister is not satisfied that the applicant is a ‘fit and proper’ person; or The grant of a licence would be contrary to New Zealand’s national interests. 46. Before granting a licence, the responsible Minister will be required to consult with other interested Ministers to take into account other national interests. 47. To avoid duplication and unnecessary cost, it is proposed that the responsible Minister would have power to recognise non-New Zealand licences or parts thereof and, if the Minister is 7yr8upqmdi 2016-06-08 10:27:02 Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Restricted satisfied, to exempt an applicant from any requirement that has been fulfilled by obtaining that non-New Zealand licence or part of that licence. Licence conditions 48. The licence may specify certain conditions which may include conditions designed to prevent the contamination of outer space or adverse effects on the environment of the Earth, avoid interference with the activities of others in outer space, avoid any breach of New Zealand’s international obligations, preserve national security, ensure the safety and security of launch sites and related areas, and govern the disposal of payloads in outer space on the termination of operations under the licence and related licence requirements. 49. Regulations may prescribe minimum standard conditions which are to be included in every licence. Revocations 50. There will be a power to revoke licences if concerns, particularly national security concerns, arise in relation to the licence. Other grounds for revoking licences will include matters such as making false statements, or providing false information in relation to licences, breach of licence conditions, committing serious offences, or concerns about health and safety. 51. The responsible Minister will have the power to revoke the licence if the Minister responsible for the New Zealand Security Intelligence Service issues a certificate that continuation of the licence poses a risk to national security, or for breach of licence conditions, or for other grounds including matters such as making false statements, providing false information in relation to licenses, committing serious offences, or concerns about health and safety. Liability Risk sharing versus risk transfer 5 2.The international liability to pay compensation reflects that at the time the international treaties were negotiated, in the late 1960s and early 1970s, space launches were still largely government activities. Technology advances in the development of small satellites has changed this and a greater number of public and private entities are now participating in space activities. 53. States don’t tend to take responsibility for risks caused by private entities as the State does not create the risks, nor is best placed to manage them. These are matters for the owners/operators of space objects. In light of this many states pass off liability to the owners/operators of space objects, both through stating in legislation that they have liability, and through the requirement for insurance. However some states, such as the US, take a risk-sharing approach with the objective of encouraging the development of the space industry. 54. The US (and the Netherlands), have developed regulatory regimes based on risk-sharing i.e. the US government will require the licensee to carry insurance for part of the risk and will itself carry the rest of the risk. The assessment in these countries is that risk sharing is necessary to foster the development of the space industry1. 55. In response to the international liability to pay compensation, other jurisdictions such as Australia take the approach of requiring the licensee to have insurance to reimburse the government for the cost of international claims for damage up to a certain amount. It has been claimed that the financial burden resulting from the liability rules is one of the factors that has made the Australian regime too costly and inhibited the development of a space launch industry.2 1 The conversation.com/space treaties are a challenge to launching small satellites in orbit. 2 Shooting for the stars: Turnball government aims to stimulate space industry Restricted 7yr8upqmdi 2016-06-08 10:27:02 Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Restricted 60. Our advice on this is to include a provision in the primary legislation to authorise the responsible Minister to require an indemnity against the Crown’s liability in whole or in part and to set licence conditions requiring insurance for a specified amount. Regulation-making powers 61. There will need to be broad regulation-making powers including: powers to make regulations prescribing fees, information and standard terms and conditions to be included in licence applications, any procedural requirements including time limits and extensions relating to applications, security requirements (e.g. adherence to the Protective Security Requirements) and security enhanced areas, procedures and processes for launch safety investigations and launch recovery operations, and other matters as necessary for the proper administration of the Act. Assessment of prescriptive vs permissive approach 62 . We’ve assessed these two approaches against the regulatory design principles in the following table Design principlesPrescriptive regime Permissive regime Minimum necessary×  7yr8upqmdi 2016-06-08 10:27:02 s 9(2)(j), s 9(2)(f)(iv) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Restricted What constitutes the ‘minimum’ will change over time, as international space law evolves to deal with new technologies and new markets. It is not possible to precisely predict the direction of these developments and attempts to do are likely to be based on incorrect assumptions which could undermine the efficacy of the law over time. In addition, what is the ‘minimum’ in relation objectives such as national security is highly dependent on a case-by-case risk assessment. A permissive approach allows judgements on what is the minimum necessary to be reflected in the decision to licence and in the licence conditions. A permissive approach provides flexibility for the conditions to evolve as information becomes available on what the “minimum necessary. Certain and predictable Prescriptive approaches can provide more certainty, but in relation to space law this should not be overstated as there is always going to be a discretional element (to licence or not having regard to a range of objectives). Prescriptive approaches may inadvertently result in scenarios where there is greater uncertainty over the long-term than a permissive regime because the particular circumstances around a new market or technology were not contemplated which may result in a need to review and amend the law more frequently. × The margin of discretion is higher for the discretionary approach which on the face of it would tend to reduce certainty, particularly over the short-term until practice leads to the development of case law. However, this should also not be overstated relative to the prescriptive approach as the objectives that the decision-maker needs to balance will be clearly set out in the primary legislation. Flexible× A prescriptive approach in the primary legislation will limit the scope for the law to adapt to deal with new technologies or new markets.  The permissive approach is more amenable to tailoring decisions to the particular case. Consistent with domestic lawBoth options are intended to be consistent with domestic law. Restricted 7yr8upqmdi 2016-06-08 10:27:02 Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Restricted 63. We conclude that a permissive approach is the best way to achieve the policy objectives and to address the problems that have been identified. While a permissive regime provides for less certainty and predictability than a prescriptive regime in the short-term until practice and case-law has been established, a prescriptive regime carries a greater risk that the law will become outdated more quickly as the assumptions on which it is based no longer hold in the face of changes to technology and the market. As the permissive regime meets the other design criteria better than the prescriptive regime, our advice is that this approach is more suitable to the challenges of designing a legal framework for an industry undergoing fast- paced technological change. High altitude activities regime B ackground 64. A key objective of the proposed space activities regime is to facilitate the development of a safe, secure and responsible New Zealand space industry. To ‘future proof’ the legislation for ongoing developments in technology and to ensure that different technologies providing similar services are treated consistently, it is proposed that certain high altitude activities are brought within scope of the legislation. 65. In many cases, these technologies are dual purpose (military and civil). By including certain high altitude activities within the scope of the legislation, the New Zealand government will have the ability to control near space activities that originate from New Zealand territory and ensure that they are consistent with our national interests. This approach is consistent with the proposition that New Zealand’s space policy and space law should encompass all of New Zealand’s interests in space. The problem 66. The Civil Aviation Act 1990 governs the civil aviation system in New Zealand (international and domestic). It provides for the economic regulation of licensing and international air services competition for foreign and New Zealand international airlines. It also establishes the safety and security framework for civil aviation. Security in this context is read as aviation security. This is relatively narrow in scope – only covering risks to safety from the carriage of dangerous goods and the risk to aviation security by unlawful interference with an aircraft. The CA Act has no powers to control activities or operations that may pose a threat to national security or are not in the national interest. 67. The current review of the CA Act may address this gap. Aircraft as defined in the CA Act includes balloons and remotely piloted aerial systems (RSPAs, sometimes known as drones). Rockets are not captured by this definition, and are therefore not covered by the regime, except for air traffic control purposes to ensure any rocket launch does not interfere with aircraft operations. The regulation of aircraft operations (including balloons and RSPAs) operating in near space is therefore unsatisfactory from a national security / national interest perspective. 68. The lack of a regulatory framework for high altitude activities creates the following problems: 7yr8upqmdi 2016-06-08 10:27:02 Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Restricted Lack of certainty for commercial operators about what rules apply to their activities in New Zealand. This may inhibit investment in research and development activities and new business ventures.
Nominations are now closed, the 2023 nominees can be found below.
Nominees should be from the following categories:
Nominees should demonstrate a commitment to excellence in scientific research and cooperation with scientists from other APEC member economies, including inclusive and interdisciplinary collaborations in subjects such as:
Non - legislative actions aimed at resolving Holidays Act compliance issues have been progressed 7
Non-standard employment arrangements will have additional criteria for access to the scheme:
None identified at this stage
None identified at this stage.
North Island Weather Events Primary Producer Finance Scheme
Not have a permanent position (in general, scientists with permanent positions, in particular the professor/tenure level, will not be admitted to the Summit).
Not have participated on-site in previous GYSS, with the exceptions of GYSS 2021 and 2022 (online editions), and
Not less than 3 day per week deliveries to 99.88% of delivery points.
Note that Section 51 o f the Act allows the Minister to treat an overseas licence, permit or other authorisation as satisfying some or all of the criteria for the granting of a launch licence, overseas launch
Note that Section 51 of the Act allows the Minister to treat an overseas licence, permit or other authorisation as satisfying some or all of the criteria for the granting of a payload permit or overseas payload permit. 1.6 Payload permits may not be granted for objects smaller than 1U unless they can demonstrate trackability or have a limited orbital lifetime 1.6.1 Payloads that can suitably demonstrate trackability equivalent to a 1U object may be permitted if they mitigate trackability concerns related to their small size : + These concerns are mitigated, for example, through the deployment of antenna, solar panels, o r other components that increase the radar cross section of the object to the equivalent of a 1U object , or the use of reflectors or beacons that transmit location data . + Applicants should demonstrate the reliability and performance of the mechanism used t hrough testing, analysis or by other means. Assurance will be verified through the NZSA’s own assessment process.
Note that some payload permits are for more than 1 satellite.
Note that submissions may be requested under the Official Information Act 1982 (the OIA). If you have any objection to the release of any information in your submission, please clearly indicate this in your submission form, or cover email accompanying your submission. Clearly indicate which parts of your submission you consider should be withheld under the OIA and the reason why.
Note that the Contract and Commercial Law Act 2017 repealed and replaced the Electronic Transactions Act 2002 (in addition to other legislation), but only made non-consequential amendments.
Note that the MBIE top-up scheme does not apply to actions outside of Pillar 2.
Note that the data in the charts are calculated using undiscounted retail prices, and will therefore generally be at a higher level than our weekly importer margins. Take care when comparing these series.
Note: Events taking place between 25 December and 7 January are excluded in both years.
Note: Only applicants from ESA member or associate member countries are eligible to apply.
Note: The file 'Jobs Online Detailed occupational data' is now a csv file and the formats of the variable names have changed.
Note: You can end the session at any time by closing the app or clicking the red X icon.
Note: updated version published 27 February 2025
Noted We recommend simplifications to the framework for providing AL entitlement Cabinet agreed to changes to provide employees access to AL before entitlement arises
Noted and no action required - This submission has been noted, but t he direct relevance of this submission to the Review is not clear. Note: While it is not within the remit of the OSHAA to prescribe the statutory requirements for environmental matters of the nature that the submitter has raised, adherence to New Zealand’s environmental legislation is incorporated into the OSHAA. There are several references in the Act which explicitly cites compliance with New Zealand’s environmental legislation as a requirement. For example, section 10(1)(g)(iv) provides that, to obtain a launch licence, the licensee must conduct the launch and operations in a manner that complies with New Zealand law, including, without limitation, the Civil Aviation Act 1990 , any regulations and rules made under that Act, and all health and safety and environmental legislation. This is one of many similar provisions in the Act. ETHICAL INVESTMENT Robert Howell This submitter provided commentary on the theme of unethical investment funds and cited the OSHAA within their submission. The submission provides a suggestion regarding the definition of an ethical company and proposes that if this definition (or similar) were to be included in the Governme nt’s procurement policy, then the OSHAA could include a requirement to conform to this policy. As the Act does not relate to investment, it is difficult to see the analogy that is being drawn with New Zealand Government procurement. Notwithstanding that the OSHAA is cited, the Review considers this part of the submission to be outside the scope of t his review.
Nothing can be achieved without a plan, a workforce and a way of doing things
Notice process to cover file sharing infringements
Notice setting the criteria for selecting the New Zealand Food Safety Science and Research Centre host
Notwithstanding the above, New Zealand Post shall continue to provide:
Now that our border is open and we are welcoming back international visitors, the tourism sector is beginning to rebuild. Global and domestic challenges will continue to impact the recovery. There is uncertainty in the global economy, including inflationary pressures, high fuel and other travel costs, reduced air connectivity, labour shortages and constrained supply chains.
Now that you have read about different aspects of our proposed New Zealand Income Insurance Scheme, what do you think overall? Do you think New Zealand needs the scheme, taking into account what employers and employees will need to pay? What do you see as the strengths and weaknesses of the scheme?
Now the advantage of having all that is probably an easier consenting process. It's also easier to talk to the various users and users of the building. But also with the complexity of the range of users here, it also means that a lot of things can be simulated and tried out. When you look at things like energy efficiency, the carbon impact sustainability of the materials, longevity of the materials, going a bit beyond digital engineering and looking at a number of different things.
Now we have entered the design phase. So, we have a lot of options. As you can see some fancy little cartoon type of buildings appearing and disappearing and moving. So this is really just to emphasise that what we'd be looking at with the use of the data that we're going to be putting into this digital twin is to look at what options might work.
Now, we're going to go and talk through a use case. So what we've looked at is a scenario where a digital twin could be used as a case in New Zealand. And we've chosen the built environment. And the reason for that is in the digital twin space, what we're seeing is, that's probably the area where digital twins are becoming adopted, probably most quickly. Not exclusively, but the advantages of the digital twin are being seen in built environment spaces more quickly than other areas.
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
Nuclear disarmament/non-proliferation
Number of invoices for quarter
Number of payload permits approved
Numerous brands now sell green shell mussel oil, that product comes in a range of concentrations (of the lipid fraction).
O)-based satellite propulsion technology for sustainable space transportation
OECD AI Principles overview
OECD Committee for Scientific and Technological Policy (CSTP)
OECD Global Science Forum
OIA statistics - Te Kawa Mataaho Public Service Commission
OIIR Export Control and Interagency Liaison Division (ECILD)
OPTION 1 104. The first option is to introduce an upper limit into the high -altitude definition. There ar e a small number of jurisdictions that have adopted an upper spatial limit for the purposes of either defining when a launch licence is required or for the purposes of defining an upper limit of a high - altitude regime. These are described below. Australia 105. The Space (Launches and Returns) Act 2018 incorporate s into the definitions of ‘launch’ , ‘return’ and ‘space object’, a reference to ‘the distance of 100km above mean sea level ’. The launch and
ORCID identifiers (iDs) are a non-proprietary 16-digit alphanumeric code that distinguishes you from other researchers. They are used to link all of your research outputs and activities together in a record that is integrated with other publishers, institutes, funders and research-related services.
OT and MoJ met with the Chief Justice of Kiribati in May to discuss working collaboratively with the Kiribati judiciary to implement child safeguarding measures in the adoption process, to prevent trafficking and exploitation of children. Due to the current political situation in Kiribati, which is impacting on the judiciary, this engagement has been on hold.
OT has begun collecting data on reports of concern (ROCs) which allege forced labour, child trafficking or slavery.
OT has completed a pilot test of the people trafficking training, and work to adapt the modules for an OT context will be prioritised in the first quarter of 2023.
OT is continuing to collect data on reports of concern (ROCs) which allege forced labour, child trafficking or slavery. This includes data on demographics, key sectors involved, and source countries.
OT to identify training needs of evidential interviewers and develop training material / access to existing training courses. OT also plans to conduct a gap analysis to identify current practices in interviewing victims, and what is needed to strengthen these practices, but it has not progressed in 2022.
OT to identify training needs of evidential interviewers and develop training material/access to existing training courses.
Obligation to provide competitors with access to the NZ Post postal network.
Obligations of postal operators
Obtaining the scholarship is conditional upon the successful candidate signing a contractual agreement with MBIE and includes a number of obligations.
Occupations listed in Schedule 1A receive additional employment protections in certain restructuring situations set out in Subpart 1 of Part 6A of the Employment Relations Act.
Ocean observation project takes New Zealand from world trailing to world leading
October 2020 Monthly Regional Tourism Estimates (MRTEs)
Of 17,288 kt of waste generated, 92% ended up in landfill:
Of all the channels used, the Adviser Line at the Immigration Contact Centre was viewed most positively (70%). It was perceived as friendly, willing to help and having a positive attitude to problem solving. However, there were concerns about accuracy, consistency, and lack of specificity, leading to suggestions for improved staff training and more experienced staff on the line.
Of all the channels, advisers were least positive about their experience of dealing with VACs, with a quarter expressing dissatisfaction. They were unhappy with the time taken by VACs to submit completed applications, and their treatment of advisers as professionals. Suggested enhancements related to the need for improved communication between VACs and advisers, and keeping advisers updated on applications submitted through them.
Of those people granted residence in 2001/02, 79.6% were still in New Zealand after 5 years compared with 89.1% of those granted residence in 2011/12.
Office Of The Privacy Commissioner
Office of the Deputy Secretaries
Office of the Deputy Secretary (BRM)
Office of the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety Cabinet Economic Policy Committee
Office of the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety Chair, Cabinet Economic Development Committee
Office of the Ombudsman Response Calculator
Office of the Privacy Commissioner
Office of the Privacy Commissioner, if relevant.
Officers (eg director or chief executive)
Official Information Act 1982
Official Information Act release
Official Information Act requests
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace 16 February 2018 (part 1 of 22) [PDF 4.3MB]
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace 16 February 2018 (part 10 of 22) [PDF 20MB]
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace 16 February 2018 (part 11 of 22) [PDF 20MB]
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace 16 February 2018 (part 12 of 22) [PDF 10MB]
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace 16 February 2018 (part 13 of 22) [PDF 8MB]
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace 16 February 2018 (part 14 of 22) [PDF 7.9MB]
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace 16 February 2018 (part 15 of 22) [PDF 6.1MB]
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace 16 February 2018 (part 16 of 22) [PDF 20MB]
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace 16 February 2018 (part 17 of 22) [PDF 20MB]
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace 16 February 2018 (part 18 of 22) [PDF 20MB]
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace 16 February 2018 (part 19 of 22) [PDF 6.6MB]
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace 16 February 2018 (part 2 of 22) [PDF 120KB]
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace 16 February 2018 (part 20 of 22) [PDF 7.9MB]
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace 16 February 2018 (part 21 of 22) [PDF 7.8MB]
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace 16 February 2018 (part 22 of 22) [PDF 5.4MB]
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace 16 February 2018 (part 3 of 22) [PDF 14MB]
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace 16 February 2018 (part 4 of 22) [PDF 13MB]
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace 16 February 2018 (part 5 of 22) [PDF 11MB]
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace 16 February 2018 (part 6 of 22) [PDF 8.4MB]
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace 16 February 2018 (part 7 of 22) [PDF 19MB]
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace 16 February 2018 (part 8 of 22) [PDF 2.4MB]
Official Information Act response to Greenpeace 16 February 2018 (part 9 of 22) [PDF 19MB]
Official Information Request form
Officials from the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) are currently working to design the details of the new approach.
Offshore petroleum permit granted and Block Offer 2020 tender opens
Offshore renewable energy
Older Workers (50 and over)
Older Workers Employment Action Plan - released in April 2022
Older Workers Employment Action Plan launched
Older energy consultations and reviews
Oliver Valins, Chief Advisor to the Secretary
Oliver holds a PhD in Geography from the University of Glasgow.
On 10 May 2021 the Consumer Information Standards (Origin of Food) Regulations 2021 (the Regulations) were made under the Fair Trading Act 1986. These Regulations give effect to the requirements in the Act by setting the detailed country of origin labelling requirements.
On 11 December 2015, the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs released a discussion document seeking comment on potential disclosure regulations for third-party fundraisers who are making requests for funds for charitable purposes.
On 11 June 2021 the Scheme was extended 6 months from the original end date of 30 June 2021, to 31 December 2021.
On 14 July 2022 the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) was officially designated as a Child Welfare and Protection Agency (CWPA) under the Oranga Tamariki Act 1989.
On 18 April 2024, MBIE on behalf of the Minister for ACC released a consultation document on proposed changes to regulations made under the Accident Compensation Act 2001, essentially addressing the following three topics: Chinese medicine, paramedics, and audiometrists.
On 18 December 2024 the Minister for Media and Communications agreed to amend the Chorus TSO Deed to enable Chorus to retire Customer Multi Access Radio (CMAR) and Country Set (CS) legacy technology used to provide TSO telephone service.
On 2 December 2024, Cabinet confirmed the proposed levy rates outlined in the table below.
On 20 December 2023, the Fair Pay Agreements legislation was repealed.
On 21 August 2024, following a recommendation of the Financial Markets Authority, the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs placed a number of entities and subsidiaries of the Du Val Group into statutory management under the Corporation (Investigations and Management) Act 1989.
On 27 January 2023 the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) opened consultation on options to address safety risks presented by corded window coverings. MBIE is seeking feedback on a range of options to further address the safety risks corded window coverings pose to young children.
On 28 February 2024, we met with you to discuss
On 6 December 2022, MBIE released the Te Ara Paerangi Future Pathways White Paper. The white paper included key policy directions and actions for the Te Ara Paerangi programme. These are no longer proceeding.
On application for confirmation of an amalgamation or transfer under section 136(1) of the Act 355.56 The service has not been provided in 25 years. There are only three remaining credit unions, therefore it is anticipated that this service can be managed with no additional fee. 38 Table 2 3: Proposed fees for Retirement Villages register services $ (excluding GST) Retirement Villages register Unit Cost Proposed fee Proposed levies Proposed total charge (recovering $42m) Current charge (fee) Change in charge % change Registration application 643.05 645.00 - 645.00 782.61 (137.61) (18%) Annual return* (< 34 units) - 370.00 - 370.00 347.83 22.17 6% Annual return* (35 – 84 units) 634.91 620.00 - 620.00 565.22 54.78 10% Annual return* (> 85 units) - 1,270.00 - 1,270.00 1,130.43 139.57 12% *includes the financial statement filing cost of $170.00 Registration and application annual return fees There is currently a single application fee, and fees for the annual return are set using a tiered system based on the number of units available for occupation by residents (i.e. less than 3 5 units; 35 to 84 units; or more than 85 units). The overall cost to manage the register has risen since 2007. However, the cost of delivering these services has shifted from being incurred mainly by processing registration applications, to the processing of key information and reviewing financial statem ents in the form of an annual return. There are fewer than 1 2 new registrations per year, but approximately 450 annual returns. When fees were last set in 2011 the cost for the Companies Office to review annual financial statements was not included. It was incorrectly assumed that these costs would be able to be recovered through the financial reporting statement filing fee under the Companies Act . Therefore, the proposed annual return fee now includes the cost of filing financial statements ($170.00 regardless of the number of units). We propose to increase the annual return fees but reduce the application fee. We propose that retirement villages continue to pay a tiered annual return fee according to the number of units they have, because it remains more equitable for larger retirement villages to pay a higher fee as they have a larger base by which to recover that cost. Land transfer fees It is proposed that sections 4 (b)(c), 6 (a) -(c) and 7 of the Retirement Villages (Fees) Regulations 2006 are amended to refer to fees charged by the Registrar -General of Land, as set out in the Land Transfer Act 2017, and the regulations thereunder . Under the Retirement Villages (Fees) Regulations 2006 , registration of Retirement Villages on property titles ( regulation 4), notifying the Registrar of any changes to the property, building or premises comprising a retirement village ( regulation 6), and any request to cancel the registration of a village ( regulation 7) has prescribed fees equivalent to amounts charged by Land Information New Zealand (LINZ) under an outdated version of the Land Transfer Regulations 2018 . These fees should align with the fees set routinely by LINZ for comparable transactions, currently set out in Schedule 7, Part 2 of the Land Transf er Regulations 2018. It is likely that the Land Transfer Regulations 2018 will be reviewed and amended again in the future. To reflect the current fee and avoid a future misalignment of fees between the Retirement Villages 39 (Fees) Regulations 2006 and Land Transfer Regulations 2018 , it is proposed that instead of stating a specific fee, the Retirement Villages regulations refer to fees charged by the Registrar -General of Land, as set out in the Land Transfer Act 201724 and the regulations made under the Act. Method of payment Currently the Retirement Villages (Fees) Regulations 2006 section 10 refers to how fees and penalties may be paid. We propose that fees and penalties can no longer be paid by cheque, in line with financial service providers and government departments phasing out cheque payments in 2021.25 Insolvency Practitioners Under the Insolvency Practitioners Regulation Act 2019 the Companies Office is responsible for maintaining a register that captures key information about licensed insolvency practitioners that is provided to accredited bodies. The current fees and levy came into effect on 1 September 2020. Section 4 propose s no change in the levy amount of $1.00 that is collected from users on the Companies register. Table 2 4 below shows the proposed adjustments to current fees for insolvency practitioners. Table 24: Proposed fees for Insolvency Practitioners register services $ (excluding GST) Insolvency Practitioners register Unit Cost Proposed fee Proposed levies Proposed total charge Current charge (fee) Change in charge % change Licence registration 186.21 185.00 - 185.00 165.00 20.00 12% Annual confirmation 68.45 70.00 - 70.00 105.00 (35.00) (33%) Registration and annual return fees The registration fee was first established using the higher volume of practitioners becoming licensed under the Insolvency Practitioners Regulation Act 2019 . Now that the scheme has been established the register operating cost is less than forecast, but the annual forecast of new practitioners has also decreased resulting in a proposed increased registration fee. On the other hand, overall, there are more practitioners licensed than forecast, with reduced operating costs related to the annual confirmation p rocess resulting in a proposed decrease in the annual confirmation fee. Auditors Under the Auditor Regulation Act 2011 the Companies Office is responsible for maintaining a register that captures key information of licensed auditors received from accredited bodies. The fees have not been adjusted since 2011. The proposed fees in Table 25 on the next page reflect the general increase of the cost of the service since that time. Table 2 5: Proposed fees for Auditors register services
On this page you will find links to previous Economic Development initiatives and plans.
On-Demand services are readily available for common and widely spoken languages. Some rare languages may require pre-booking as they may not always be available on-demand.
Once ACC has concluded its review, it must provide a report to the Minister for ACC giving the results of the review and its recommendations. The report is required to be delivered by 1 December in the year the review is conducted.
Once implemented, MBIE would be the agency responsible for administering the legislation. Following the consultation process, we will develop a plan to support businesses and payroll providers. The plan will include recommendations for new tools, r esources, guidance and engagement activities,
Once in force, the new law will enable collective contracts to be negotiated. Occupational contracts will come into effect 6 months after bargaining concludes. Enterprise contracts will come into effect when they are signed by bargaining parties, or at a later date if agreed.
Once nominations are received, PPSTI members across the APEC region rank the nominees through a selection ballot to determine the winner.
Once the assessment is completed, we release a public summary of the assessment.
Once the relevant team in MBIE receives your complaint you can expect that they:
Once we have considered the submissions, we will develop the final proposals. If these proposals are approved by Cabinet, they will form the basis of revised regulations under the various pieces of legislation that regulate the fees and levies considered in this document. See the section "Purpose of this document" for a proposed timeline of key milestones.
Once you have submitted your feedback to us, all submissions will be analysed to help inform our final recommendations to the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs.
Once you start studying you will be able to decide what to specialise in to get into the type of work you really want to do.
One New Zealand Group Ltd
One issue the Accords deals with is space resource utilisation. The ability to use space resources (the mineral resources in and on the moon and other celestial bodies) is critical to enable the next phase of space exploration, including to the possibility of sending humans to Mars. Recent technological advances have made space resource utilisation feasible which has increased states interest in addressing it in national policy and regulation. Given the increasing importance of this issue, space resource utilisation needed to be considered alongside our membership in the Accords.
One of the learnings of these polls is never play the middle option.
One of the main reasons we looked at marine bioactives is that it is a great example of adding value to an existing biomass. New Zealand wild capture production peaked in 1997-1998 and has been trending down since as quotas are reduced to maintain stock. Marine bioactives is using marine resources but one of the challenges here is the amount of marine resources we are taking out of the ocean, for very good and sustainable reasons, it is decreasing.
One of the most comprehensive global databases for standards relevant to circular economy revealed that there were 559 international standards relating to circular economy as of 2022. An example of this is the International Organization for Standardisation (ISO) working toward standard language and approaches for the circular economy (ISO/TC 323).
One of the other ways we look, we look at the supply chain here is looking at who participates across the supply chain, so, the is obviously a lot of dairy processes moving into specialist ingredients, importers and then a lot of manufacturers and blenders, contract manufacturers and a lot of brand only which have been manufactured by others which are then being exported or just supplied to the local market.
One of the proposals in the Masterplan, released to the public in July 2021, was to place controls on accessing the road from Te Anau to Milford Sound Piopiotahi. The Masterplan proposed to do this in two ways:
One of the recommendations was that the National Plan that outlines how MBIE and the partner agencies manage interference with permitted offshore petroleum and minerals activities under the Crown Minerals Act be refreshed.
One onshore petroleum exploration permit granted
One onshore petroleum exploration permit has today been granted through the Block Offer 2020 competitive tender process.
One-fifth of those approved were under the
One-off pieces of research.
One-off research project resulting in 2 publications in 2017.
Ongoing ownership of this policy and ensuring compliance.
Online Crimestoppers form
Online dispute resolution (2017)
Online dispute resolution [PDF 869KB]
Online financial scams are a growing problem in New Zealand. Losses were just under $200 million dollars in 2023. The issue crosses a number of sectors, including banking, telecommunications, and digital platforms. Work has been underway to establish a coordinated approach to combatting scams.
Online job advertisements are a proxy for all job advertisements as there are other forms of advertising. Online job advertisements are also a proxy for job vacancies, a key indicator of labour demand, as some vacancies are not advertised. Duplicate advertisements within each job board, across job boards and months are removed.
Online job advertisements continued to decline across all 5 skill levels, with advertisements for unskilled jobs seeing the largest annual and 5-year decline.
Online learning modules for public service staff
Only one data project application per applicant
Only postal operators designated as New Zealand's Universal Postal Union administration can issue official New Zealand stamps, ie a stamp with the words, or abbreviation for 'New Zealand'. Currently, New Zealand Post Ltd has sole right to this designation.
Open Government Partnership
Open access deeds of undertaking
Open access to weather data consultation 2016
Open access to weather data review
Open and upcoming science and innovation funding opportunities
Open government and official information
Open letter to the banking sector
Opened in May 2021, the Lake Dunstan Trail attracted over 84,000 users in its first year of operation, helping support local cafes and restaurants, wineries, accommodation providers and bike hire services in Cromwell, Clyde and the wider region.
Openly shared datasets should be accompanied by appropriate metadata including attribution and provenance information, and any other necessary information for researchers to appropriately understand the datasets and limitations thereof.
Operational Policy : Technical Capability 1.1 Purpose of this document This is the New Zealand Space Agency ’s (NZSA ) policy which sets out the approach that will be taken when assessing , and preparing advice for the Minister of Economic Development, whether an applicant is technically capable of safely conducting a launch, or safely operating a launch facility, under the Outer Space and High -altitude Activities Act 2017 ( the Act ) and the Oute r Space and High -altitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulations 2017 ( the Regulations ). 1.2 When to apply this policy This policy will be applied when assessing applications for:  Launch licence  Overseas launch licence  Facility licence  High- altitude licence (where the vehicle proposed to be launched is not an aircraft) 1.3 Relevant sections in the Act and Regulations The Act require s the Minister to be satisfied that an applicant is technically capable of safely conducting the activities authorised by a licence in order to grant that licence . The exception is an application for a high - altitude licence where the vehicle propos ed to be launched is an aircraft. The relevant sections in the Act are: + 9(1)(a) : When launch licence may be granted + 25(1)(a) : When overseas launch licence may be granted + 40(1)(a) : When facility licence may be granted + 47(1)(a)(i) : When high- altitude licence may be granted The Regulations set out the information that needs to be provided with an application to demonstrate this tech nical capability. The relevant sections in the Regulations are:
Operational Policy: Technical Capability - New Zealand Space Agency [PDF 360KB]
Operational policy and guidelines for public sector agencies
Operational satellite policy
Operational shift proposal by Janice Panoho [PDF 286KB]
Operators who wish to protect their name are advised to seek independent legal advice.
Opportunities for New Zealand
Opportunities for collaboration with a diverse range of other interns and staff are provided in both formal and informal settings.
Opportunity to have your say
Option to extend support for up to 12 months for training and rehabilitation
Options for HAV Exemptions Option one – no exempti ons 49. Cabinet agreed to include an exemption making power in the OSHAA Act for vehicles “which undertake certain activities that are not intended to be subject to the high -altitude regime” (EGI 16 -MIN -0122) based on the associated level of risk. 50. Officials considered the possibility of not developing an exemption for certain classes of HAVs and instead relying on the ability to adopt a “light -touch” licensing approach for low risk activities , and the ability to tailor licence conditions appropriate to the level of risk. We were also concerned to ensure that any exemption did not inadvertently exempt other activities that should be licenced. We were also proposing not to charge fees so that the only costs 14
Options for application requirements 43. The most significant aspect of the regulations is the information that is required to be submitted i n or with an application. W e have considered two main approaches to setting these requirements. These have been assessed in terms of how well they achieve the objectives of the OSHAA Act . Option 1 – Prescribe d etailed information requirements 44. Under this option, the regulations would prescribe detailed information requirements that would apply to all applicants for a particular licence or permit, irrespective of their background, technical expertise, the purpose of mission and the type of space technologies used in the operation . Applicants would need to submit all of the information even if it wasn’t absolutely necessary to inform an assessment . This is consistent with a prescriptive approach . 45. There are a number of difficulties with adopting such an approac h. During the initial consultation phase on the regulations, MBIE received advice from industry participants that overly onerous information requirements would increase compliance costs for the industry and potentially deter operators from undertaking activities in New Zealand. In addition, MBIE received advice that the information requirements should, as far as possible, be modelled on comparable international licensing regimes to reduce the compliance costs on operators whose operations may be governed by an overseas licence as well as a New Zealand licence . In order to better understand overseas licensing requirements, MBIE considered a number of models for the application requirements including the United States, United Kingdom and Australia. Preferred o ption – Minimum necessary requirements supported by information gathering powers and guidance for applicants 46. Our preferred option is to require applicants to provide th e annexed list of requirements (see Annex 1) . The information requirements for licences and permits cover the following matters (the following list is a summary of the types of information required and not an inclusive list): • Applicant details required for all licences and permits: e.g. name, address, contact details, current nationality, legal form of organisation, details of persons with more than 10% ownership or control interest in the organisation. (This information is principally required to assess national security as well as to provide a key contact for licence and permit applications) • Information about the proposed mission and purpose, and description of the vehicle(s) and payload(s): This includes as applicable a description of the vehicle and payload capabilities, ground systems used to support the operation, launch facility and over view of protective security (including cyber security) measures or policies in place. (This information is principally to assess national interests and national security) 12
Options to expedite transition of Growth Grant recipients - R&D tax incentive briefing [PDF 107KB]
Options to manage within different funding paths, and advice on the best path.
Or see the following page for more detailed information from MBIE on participation of New Zealand entities in Horizon Europe.
Orbital Debris Mitigation - Operational Policy [PDF 223KB]
Orbital Debris Mitigation: Operational Policy Issue/Version Control Version Date Amendments V3 10 May 2023 • New recognised standards/guidelines added • Information for overseas hosted payloads added • Clarification on verification process
Orbital debris mitigation • An orbital debris mitigation plan that describes how the applicant will meet the following outcomes that reflect international best practice with respect to orbital debris mitigation: o Limitation of debris released during normal operations, o Minimisation of the potential for on -orbit break -ups; o Minimising the risk of collision; o Minimising the risk on Earth and in Space through post -mission disposal.
Orbital debris • An orbital debris mitigation plan that describes how the applicant will meet the following outcomes that reflect international best practice with respect to orbital debris mitigation: o Limitation of debris released during normal op erations, o Minimisation of the potential for on -orbit break -ups; o Minimising the risk of collision; o Minimising the risk on Earth and in Space through post -mission disposal.
Ordinary Leave Pay (OLP): OLP is a new calculation proposed by the Taskforce to replace the existing Relevant Daily Pay and Ordinary Weekly Pay calculations. OLP would include the base rate for any hours worked i n the relevant period, plus pay for any scheduled overtime ,
Ordinary Leave Pay (OLP): OLP is a new calculation proposed by the Taskforce to replace the existing Relevant Daily Pay and Ordinary Weekly Pay calculations. OLP would include the base rate for any hours worked i n the relevant period, plus pay for any scheduled overtime , 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
Ordinary Weekly Pay (‘OWP’): The amount an employee receives under their employment agreement for an ordinary working week, including regular allowances, regular productivity or incentive -based payments (including commission and bonuses), the cash value of board or lodgings, and regular overtime . Intermittent or one -off p ayments as well as discretionary payments and employer contributions to superannuati on schemes are not included in Ordinary Weekly Pay. If it is not possible to calculate the payment for an ordinary working week based on these factors then the Act includes a formula to be used to calculate O rdinary Weekly Pay (Sections 8, 10, 10A, 11, 21, 22, 24 and 71 of the Act ).
Organisational Capability and Assurance Committee (OrCA)
Organisations involved in the provision of specialised support services
Organisations, industry bodies and companies, not owned by the Government, funding or carrying out research.
Oro Mauri is dedicated to utilising western technology to cultivate and capture the sounds of taonga puoro (sacred instruments) and their healing properties by developing an app where users can customise their own healing tracks.
Otago Regional Workforce Plan 2022
Otago Regional Workforce Plan 2023 update
Other agencies have roles and functions in the system but these agencies are not parties to the charter nor are they owners of it.
Other details • Details of spectrum authorisations (current and pending) for the high altitude vehicle • Details of spectrum authorisations for any earth stations within New Zealand jurisdiction that it is intended th e high altitude vehicle will transmit to or receive from • International Telecommunications Union Advanced Publication Information (API) number(s) and associated status where required (when known)
Other details • Details of spectrum authorisations (current and pending) for the high altitude vehicle • Details of spectrum authorisations for any earth stations within New Zealand jurisdiction that it is intended the high altitude vehicle will transmit to or receive from Details related to an applicant’s fitness to hold a licence
Other details • Details of spectrum authorisations (current and pending) for the high altitude vehicle • Details of spectrum authorisations for any earth stations within New Zealand jurisdiction that it is intended the high altitude vehicle will transmit to or receive from • International Telecommunications Union Advanced Publication Informatio n (API) number(s) and associated status where required (when known)
Other engaged stakeholders (eg universities and sector providers).
Other governement strategies
Other issues 4.4 83. We are aware of a number of other issues that are not specifically related to entitlements and payments for annual holidays and BAPS leave, which are detailed in Annex Two.
Other issues: A number of more minor issues have also been identified through the consultation process and included in the Report.
Other key aspects of minimum sick leave entitlements, including the ability to accumulate up to 20 days of unused sick leave, remain the same.
Other labour market reports
Other language service providers can also assist with document translation.
Other laws postal operators need to comply with
Other policy and briefing documents
Other projects taking place across government in response to the Whakaari/White Island eruption include:
Other research outputs, such as presentations, reports, books and monographs are not covered by the policy. Research data are not covered by the Open Access mandate, although this policy guidance also includes recommendations for researchers around enabling access to research data where possible.
Other space activity in New Zealand includes:
Other useful resources are available from EURAXESS Australia and New Zealand, an initiative of the European Commission providing free information about European research, career opportunities, international collaboration & networking possibilities.
Others at a workplace (eg visitors)
Otherwise Working Day (‘OWD’): An O therwise Working Day is a day that an employee would have worked, if it was not for them being sick, being o n bereavement leave, being on family violence leave, being on annual holidays or it being a public holiday (Section s 12, 13, 43 and 68 of the Act ).
Our 2016 consultations and reviews for energy-related issues.
Our 2017 consultations on energy-related issues.
Our Annual Report shows our progress against our targets and outcomes for the year ended 30 June 2023.
Our Consumer Protection team report quarterly on New Zealand's consumer issues landscape.
Our December advice to you indicated there were opportunities to simplify the Bill
Our Diversity Data Dashboard allows you to view the diversity data we have collected and gain an oversight into the diversity of applicants that have applied for MBIE science funding since 2019. You can use it to see a picture of the diversity of our funding applications, whether successful or not, by fund, year, and information type.
Our Dynamic Earth (ENVS522)
Our Energy modelling work programme produces projections of future energy supply, demand, prices and emissions.
Our European and US Counsellors also represent the New Zealand Space Agency overseas.
Our Future Services Programme Gateway Review Report Extract (October 2024) [PDF 2.6MB]
Our Future Services is our roadmap to improve 4 key areas:
Our Future Services: Detailed Business Case [PDF 8.4MB]
Our International tourism forecasts are based on econometric modelling, current trends and forecasts of international factors, and are developed with tourism industry input.
Our Regulatory Systems Stewardship Strategy
Our Science Board is the statutory body responsible for making independent investment decisions for the Endeavour Fund and National Science Challenges.
Our Science Board is the statutory body responsible for making independent investment decisions for the Endeavour Fund, National Science Challenges and Partnerships.
Our Strategic Intentions / Statement of Intent describes our role and function in the public sector; the outcomes we aim to achieve in support of the Government and New Zealand; and how success will be measured.
Our Trade and International team is responsible for overseeing standards and conformance infrastructure in New Zealand and advising the Government on related policy.
Our address or the email address for your MBIE contact
Our ambition for regulatory stewardship is to create and maintain regulatory systems that prevent harm and enable Aotearoa New Zealand's people, businesses, and future generations to thrive. At the heart of this is the need for stewardship to be in our DNA. We also have an opportunity to leverage our scale, scope and connection.
Our analysis and commentary from our labour market forecasting programme informs New Zealand employers and government policy.
Our annual National Survey of Employers (NSE) collects data on workplace practices in New Zealand businesses within the context of current employment-focused legislation.
Our arrangement with the UK Space Agency describes how New Zealand and the UK would work together on joint ADR and IOS missions, by establishing principles and guidance to reduce legal, policy, and regulatory barriers associated with multi-state ADR and IOS missions.
Our assessment of regulatory systems
Our assessments are conducted by a small team of our staff not directly involved in the system, sometimes supplemented by a member from another agency.
Our business friendly environment and future-focused policy and regulatory settings make New Zealand an attractive choice to research and develop new ideas and products.
Our capability priorities
Our collective focus areas
Our commitment to using ORCID iDs
Our current work programme includes negotiating and implementing labour commitments in trade agreements, meeting our reporting and relationship obligations to the International Labour Organization, participating in the APEC Human Resources Development Working Group and developing advice on a range of international labour-focussed policy issues including modern slavery and migrant worker exploitation.
Our datasets on data.govt.nz
Our employment strategy: Everyone working to deliver a productive, sustainable and inclusive New Ze...
Our employment website has
Our employment website has more information as follows:
Our employment website has the
Our employment website has the most up-to-date information about parental leave, including eligibility, payments and returning to work.
Our energy modelling work programme produces projections of future energy supply, demand, prices and emissions.
Our experimental Modelled Territorial Authority Gross Domestic Product (MTAGDP) estimates provide annual GDP estimates for 66 territorial authority areas and 18 industry groups.
Our followers can expect to receive regular updates covering some or all of the following:
Our funding and support programmes aim to build a high-performing science and innovation system that will transform New Zealand into a more diverse, technologically advanced, smart nation.
Our funding and support programmes aim to build a high-performing science and innovation system.
Our government is confidently backing entrepreneurs already working in space-related activities, and welcomes others to join our emerging space industry. This aligns to our goal to develop New Zealand as a hub for high-value, knowledge-intensive businesses through innovation and research and development (R&D).
Our innovative partnerships programme is dedicated to helping research and development intensive businesses connect, collaborate and invest in New Zealand.
Our international engagement programme includes visits to, and discussions with other national space agencies, potential investors and entrepreneurs and other government regulators.
Our international labour relations
Our involvement in space, R&D, and world-leading innovative international science partnerships.
Our latest news and media releases.
Our laws minimise unnecessary prescription, by including detailed requirements in regulation. Compliance costs are also minimised, by enabling overseas licences to satisfy New Zealand requirements.
Our legislation empowers us to request or demand the information we need to give effect to that legislation, including to monitor and ensure compliance, as well as carry out investigations where we believe people or organisations may be in breach.
Our media centre provides contact details and links to common media topics.
Our mission is to regulate space and high-altitude activities, including launch and satellites
Our most recent occasional papers
Our older consultations and reviews on energy-related issues.
Our on-screen and off-screen talent, our production facilities, and our unique landscapes continue to make an important contribution to the screen sector and the wider New Zealand economy.
Our on-screen and off-screen talent, our production facilities, and our unique landscapes continue to make an important contribution to the sector and the wider New Zealand economy.
Our open and scheduled science and innovation funding and investment opportunities.
Our organisational strategy: Te Ara Amiorangi
Our partnership has continued at pace since the collaboration began.
Our people are the greatest asset in meeting the challenges of the future. MBIE aims to deliver better support and more opportunities for the research, science and innovation workforce.
Our policy advice on maintaining an efficient standards and conformance infrastructure helps remove technical barriers to improve trade.
Our predictions for the future are never guaranteed, but are still useful tools for planning, weighing up different options and taking proactive action if risky situations arise. Our algorithms help us understand what our future may look like so that we can stay prepared. For example, using predictive analytics to estimate business health.
Our previous service provider (former ezispeak) went into liquidation in 2021. MBIE has decided to take a strategic approach of procuring a panel of providers to deliver telephone and video interpreting language assistance services. This ensures there is a range of interpreters and languages available to meet the needs of service users and provide business continuity for New Zealand government.
Our proposals at a glance
Our proposed scheme aims to cover as many workers as possible to reflect the different ways people work, ensure more people can benefit and to keep costs low.
Our regulatory regime provides for the safe, responsible and secure use of space from New Zealand, and includes the following legislation which came into force in December 2017:
Our regulatory regime supports the growth of a safe, responsible, and secure space industry that meets our international obligations and manages any liability arising from our obligations as a launching state.
Our research and evaluation reports are contained in our
Our role in the telecommunications sector
Our role is also to administer, advise, monitor, enforce and represent as follows.
Our role is to create better outcomes for all New Zealanders, particularly by supporting business growth.
Our scheme aims to help people find good new jobs that match their skills and aspirations. It also aims to help people use the time to learn new skills or rehabilitate from a health condition or disability.
Our scheme is designed to provide enough of a financial cushion that workers have the time and financial security to find a good new job, rehabilitate, or retrain for a different career.
Our scheme will be funded through levies on workers and employers
Our senior leadership team
Our senior leadership team works collaboratively to set and guide our strategic direction.
Our social media accounts may provide links to other websites or embed material which may contain information that is the copyright of third parties and subject to restrictions on use or reproduction.
Our strategic intentions / statement of intent describes our role and function in the public sector; the outcomes we aim to achieve in support of the Government and New Zealand; and how success will be measured.
Our tools for drilling into up-to-date immigration data are available on our
Our unique geography makes New Zealand a great location for space and advanced aviation activities
Our values help guide us to be the best organisation we can be, both as a place to work and for the people we serve.
Our ways of dealing with disputes in Aotearoa New Zealand have changed in recent decades in response to a range of social and other changes. There has been a search for more cost-effective and quicker alternatives to traditional court-based resolution, particularly for civil disputes.
Our websites have security measures in place to prevent the loss, misuse and alteration of information under our control. To maintain the cyber security of our systems and information, our systems are subject to ongoing monitoring (including activity logging), analysis and auditing.
Our youth employment action plan: Setting our young people on a strong pathway to fulfilling working...
Out of Scope, s 9(2)(g)(i) 16 Concerned that this might be indicative of wider compliance issues with the Act, MBIE engaged with a number of key payroll providers and employers in 2014. This engagement indicated that problems with implementing the Act were likely to be widespread. 17 U sing research data available at that time as proxies for variable hours and pay, MBIE estimated that between 10 per cent and 40 per cent of the workforce could be affected, with employees owed, on average, between $250 and $500 per year, and with a total cost to the economy (taking into account the potential for six years ’ back pay) of between $292 m illion and $2.29 b illion. The wide range is a result of the choice of proxy data used to quantify the issue. 18 A targeted review of the Act was proposed in April 2015. However, the previous Government did not proceed on the basis that some employees and employers were likely to be worse off. For example, if a yearly averaging approach to pay for annual holidays is taken, then employees whose current pay is greater than their yearly average would lose out. Instead, MBIE was asked to look for solutions within the current legislative framework. 19 The Labour Inspectorate initiated a Payroll Strategy in 2015 that included a programme of proactive audits and investigations (and, subsequently, a number of ‘watching briefs’ in which MBIE supports employers to undertake their own audits) to identify issues with payroll systems and remediate employees . 20 The Inspectorate’s proactive audit programme initially focused on the 100 largest employers in New Zealand. As of 31 December 2017, 137 audits/investigations (including 53 proactive audits) had been completed. All of these involved some degree of non-compli ance. Of these 137 cases, 48 have finished calculating and paying arrears. These payments totalled $5.8 million to 16,600 employees (not including NZ Police – see below). Average pay outs to employees in each case ranged from $29 to $1,300, and were under $500 in 36 out of the 48 cases. 21
Out of these, 5.8%, that is 1391 people including myself, made it to the phase 2 selection that focused on psychological performance and included cognitive, technical, motor coordination and personality tests. We were all invited to Hamburg, and flown there by the ESA. We had 21 days since the lucky email arrived to sort out our travel availability, train every evening, go to work every day and deal with everything else you have to deal with preparing for a trip like that. I had to make sure I was not catching any COVID-19 either as I would not have been able to come back to New Zealand. For me it also meant that I had to be away from my family for 2 months as my quarantine spot was only on the 22 of December but I was happy to do that. I was really lucky that I just had my second vaccine so I was all good to go.
Outbound tourism data (that is, New Zealanders leaving for overseas)
Outcomes Paper: Australian and New Zealand Standard Research Classification Review 2019 [PDF 858KB]
Outcomes of a dispute resolution scheme
Outcomes of the Recognised Seasonal Employer policy review [PDF 306KB]
Outer Space Treaty requires compliance with the UN Charter, which prohibits the threat or use of force except in limited circumstances.
Outer Space and High Activities Bill
Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Bill: Final Policy Decisions [PDF 620KB]
Outer Space and High-altitude Activities (Definition of High-altitude Vehicle) Regulations 2017
Outer Space and High-altitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulations 2017
Outer Space and High-altitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulations 2017 4
Outer Space and High-altitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulations 2017: Proposed Amendment...
Outer Space and High-altitude Activities Act 2017
Outer Space and High-altitude Activities Act 2017 4
Outer Space and High-altitude Activities Act 2017 and associated regulations
Outer space and High Altitude (Licences and Permits) Regulations 2017
Outer space and high altitude activities
Outer space and high-altitude activities regulatory system
Outlines that proposed changes to the MBIE Intelligence in the Data, Insights and Intelligence branch.
Outlines the new operating model for MBIE Property Services.
Outlines the new organisational structure at MBIE.
Over 1000 schools, and 39 hospitals and health centres can access fibre broadband.
Over 250 people provided feedback. Several recurring themes centred on delivering the benefits of tourism for New Zealand and New Zealanders and helped in framing the final Strategy.
Over 30 detailed reports are available for use by:
Over 30 million people live with rare diseases across Europe alone. Meet the Kiwi involved in a Horizon Europe project that aims to leave no one behind by prioritising research into new treatments, prevention, and diagnostic pathways for rare health conditions.
Over 70 business and regulatory system and sector stakeholders engaged with by Employment NZ (ENZ) on ethical and sustainable work practice resources.
Over half (60%) found employment in the Auckland region, followed by 13% in Canterbury.
Over the 12 months from 1 July 2020 and 30 June 2021, almost 2.19 million trips were taken across the New Zealand Cycle Trail Great Rides network.
Over the last year, advertisements fell for all industries. Over the last 5 years, since the March 2020 quarter, the only industry to see overall growth in advertisements was Education.
Over time, NZRIS will provide:
Over two-thirds of student visa holders and three-quarters of work visa holders had left New Zealand 5 years after the end of those visas
Over two-thirds were under the age of 20 years and more likely to be male (54%).
Overall the feedback was strongly supportive of the possible future directions set out in the briefing, which focus on 3 key areas of opportunity:
Overall, the review found that the rapid building assessment system is perceived as a sufficient system for a building emergency response framework in Aotearoa/New Zealand.
Overview of AEWV [PDF 321KB]
Owners of existing works (including power poles, overhead lines, and other infrastructure connected with the provision of electricity) can now enter the land on which those works are located, and use the works to deploy, maintain, and upgrade fibre optic cable for delivering telecommunications services.
P ayroll providers and payroll practitioners MBIE consulted were of the unanimous view that, given the scale and complexity of the changes
PAGE 1 APP 400 MB14379_3367_SEP 2017 APP 400 ADDITIONAL KEY PERSONS FOR TECHNICAL CAPABILITY DETAILSAdditional Key Persons for Technical Capability Details This form is used for applications made under the Outer Space and High-altitude Activities Act 2017 for when there are multiple key persons relied upon for their technical capability in conducting a safe launch. Please provide the reference number for the application this form is associated with (if you have one), otherwise the name of the applicant in the application form: Your reference number Completing this form Where you are providing information on this form; you can do this by responding to the questions either directly on the form, or if needed by attaching a separate document and noting this on the form. Please provide evidence that the applicant is technically capable of conducting a safe launch, including the following information about each person who has technical capability relied on in the evidence. Full name Relationship to the applicantSummary of evidence of qualifications or previous experience to undertake the activity (evidence must be attached) Any other information considered relevant to assist with the assessment of technical capability MB14379_3367_SEP 2017 APP 400 ADDITIONAL KEY PERSONS FOR TECHNICAL CAPABILITY DETAILSPAGE 2 Full name Relationship to the applicantSummary of evidence of qualifications or previous experience to undertake the activity (evidence must be attached) Any other information considered relevant to assist with the assessment of technical capability Full name Relationship to the applicantSummary of evidence of qualifications or previous experience to undertake the activity (evidence must be attached) Any other information considered relevant to assist with the assessment of technical capability
PAGE 1 APP 800 MB14379_3367_SEP 2017 APP 800 ADDITIONAL OVERSEAS AUTHORISATION DETAILSAdditional Overseas Authorisation Details This form is used for applications made under the Outer Space and High-altitude Activities Act 2017 for which there are multiple Overseas Authorisations being submitted for recognition by the New Zealand Space Agency. Completing this form Where you are providing information on this form; you can do this by responding to the questions either directly on the form, or if needed by attaching a separate document and noting this on the form. Please provide the reference number for the application this form is associated with (if you have one), otherwise the name of the applicant in the application form: Your reference number 1.1. For each overseas authorisation please provide: The jurisdiction in which the overseas authorisation was applied for or granted. The name and contact details of the overseas regulator that is considering or has granted the overseas authorisation. The person who has been granted or is likely to be granted the overseas authorisation. If the person described in item (c) is not the applicant, that person’s relationship to the applicant. MB14379_3367_SEP 2017 APP 800 ADDITIONAL OVERSEAS AUTHORISATION DETAILSPAGE 2 1.2. For each overseas authorisation that was granted please provide: Date of grant Date it came into force (if different) Duration Number or identifier (if any) Attach a copy of the overseas authorisation (preferred) or a provide a description of its contents (including information about any conditions imposed under it) If it has been suspended or revoked, the date of any suspension or revocation 1.3. For each overseas authorisation that has been applied for but not yet granted or declined please provide: The date of the application A description of the overseas authorisation applied for
PAYG can be a fair and simple way for e mployers to provide AL entitlement in employment situations where work is genuinely intermittent and employees have no obligation to perform work that is offered. It avoids the need for complex calculations to determine what a week of entitlement means for an eligible employee and what they should be paid for AL they have used. Further, where an employer opts to offer PAYG, employees must always be offered the choice of PAYG or receiving AL entitlement so that they can receive their AL pay during periods th ey do not work.
PCBU (eg business or organisation)
PDF versions of the individual submissions received are available below:
PEACEFUL USES OF OUTER SPACE Aotearoa / New Zealand Peace Foundation
PERSON PROSECUTING : Insert name of person who signed charging documents DEFENDANT: Insert name of defendant CHARGES : Insert description of charges ( eg. 5 x Produces a fraudulently obtained passport ) SECTION and ACT: Insert section and Act charges laid under eg. ( s 351 Immigration Act 2009)
PO Box 10 094, Wellington 6140
PO Box 10152 Wellington 6143
PO Box 1473, Wellington 6140
PO1 application for registration form
PO2 Declaration by Individuals, Directors and Chief Executives form
PO3 Change registration details
PO3 Change registration form
PPSTI members will judge the nominees based on how well they have demonstrated:
PROs will be grouped by focus area:
Pacific Employment Action Plan
Pacific Employment Action Plan - released in May 2022
Pacific Essential Skills workers were more likely to be employed as Technicians and Trades Workers and as Labourers.
Pacific Immigration Development Community (PIDC) Information Sharing Working Group workshop planned for Feb 2023.
Pacific Migrants Trends and Settlement Outcomes report
Pacific Migrants Trends report
Pacific Peoples labour market trends
Pacific Wellbeing Strategy
Pacific international students were more likely to be studying in New Zealand as dependents of temporary work or student visa holders. In 2016/17:
Pacific migrants interviewed in LISNZ faced a number of challenges to becoming successful and settled in New Zealand, including limited English and low education, which may have caught many in low-paying or part-time work and made them particularly vulnerable to economic conditions.
Pacific migrants report similar or better settlement outcomes than other migrants on some indicators
Pacific migrants trends report
Pacific migrants with residence are more likely to stay in New Zealand
Pacific residence approvals have remained stable over the last 5 years - almost half approved under the Family visa stream.
Paid Parental Leave Questions and answers
Pamfleet Promotions Ltd t/a Pamfleet Post
Panel providers have signed an agreement with MBIE to provide face to face interpreting services. Providers have agreed to standardised terms, conditions, service levels and pricing. Terms outside the agreement cannot be negotiated for individual government agencies (except for service levels, where providers and individual government agencies can agree to higher service levels). Any changes to pricing need to be agreed by MBIE and the provider in a contract variation. Any contract variations would apply equally to all participating government agencies.
Parallel importing allows retailers, wholesalers and other parties to get import for resale goods subject to copyright and trade mark rights in New Zealand directly from licensed or authorised overseas sources, instead of dealing with local suppliers, licensees or agents.
Parallel importing in New Zealand
Parallel-imported goods are not pirated and counterfeit goods. They are genuine and lawful goods that have been put into circulation in another country either by, or with the consent of, the owner of the relevant copyright or trade mark.
Parental leave for parents of preterm babies
Parliamentary Corporation
Parliamentary Treaty Examination: Report of the EDSI Select Committee [PDF, 528KB]
Parliamentary Under-Secretary to the Minister for Infrastructure
Parliamentary Under-Secretary to the Minister for Media and Communications
Part 1: Context, the case for change, and options
Part 1: Overview of the Economy by Sector
Part 2: Questions for you
Part 3: Cross-cutting Sectors
Part 3: Next steps and implementation
Part 4 of the Contract and Commercial Law Act 2017
Part 4 of the Contract and Commercial Law Act 2017 (formerly the Electronic Transactions Act 2002)
Part 6A (Subpart Three) of the ERA requires employment agreements to contain an Employee Protection Provision (EPP) that sets out the process employers will follow in restructuring situations. The EPP must also include the matters employers will negotiate regarding the affected e mployee’s employment, including whether they will have the choice to transfer employment on the same terms and conditions. Rescind this decision and: • For employees specified in Schedule 1A of the ERA, retain the status quo provided for in the ERA. • For employees not specified in Schedule 1A of the E RA, expand the matters that EPPs must state employers will negotiate (if transfer of employment is negotiated) to the following : o whether or not employment wi ll be treated as continuous for the purpose of determining the employee’s service -related entitlements (including leave entitlements under the Act and rights and benefits under PLEPA) ; o whether or not the new employer will recognise all or part of the employee’s annual and alternative holiday entitlements not taken or exchanged for payment before the date of transfer (instead of the outgoing employer paying them out in accordance with the Act); o whether or not the new employer will recognise all or part of an employee’s family violence, bereavement and sick (FBS) leave entitlements not taken or exchanged for payment before the date of transfer ; o whether or not, where recognition of annual leave and alternative holiday and FBS leave entitlements is negotiat ed, an employee will be provided a choice in the matter or it will be automatic if they choose to transfer their employment . • The ERA would also include the following requirements when any of the above is negotiated:
Part 6A of the Employment Relations Act 2000 (the ERA) already provides tha t, when employees specified in Schedule 1A of the E RA are affected by restructuring ,18 they must be offered choice to transfer employment to the incoming employer, and if they do, their leave entitlements must be automatically transferred. This explicitly overrides the Holidays Act requirement to pay out entitlements. For types of employees not specified in Schedule 1A, the decision by employers to offer employees the opportunity to transfer their employment in a restructuring situation is a contractual cho ice.
Partial Test Ban Treaty 1963
Partial economic assessment of MOUs for the 5% Uplift of the New Zealand Screen Production Grant
Participants in the targeted consultation included stakeholders comprising employers, employees, and technical experts, across various industries, sectors, and population groups. MBIE selected the participants from those who registered interest in participating in June 2024.
Participating agencies can use whichever panel provider they choose. You should always treat providers fairly, by giving them as much notice as possible of requests and decisions. Give advice of any change with as much notice as possible.
Participating in other parts of Horizon Europe
Participation in face to face interpreting services panel and telephone and video interpreting services is voluntary, through an Open Syndicated Contract.
Participation in the programme does not count towards academic credit for any New Zealand qualification.
Participatory Science Platform
Partner internationally on advanced research with world-leading research institutes, including our current partnerships with NASA, the German Aerospace Center (DLR) and SmartSat CRC.
Partnership with private investors
Partnership work visa stream
Partnerships & Programmes
Past enquiries or reviews of economic regulation
Past reviews of the Commerce Act
Paul Stocks, Deputy Secretary, Building, Resources and Markets
Paul Stocks, Deputy Secretary, Building, Resources and Markets (BRM)
Paul has held a number of management roles at Treasury, with responsibility for areas including education, market interventions and tax policy. He also worked at the Ministry of Health and the New Zealand Planning Council.
Pay Transparency presentation by the National Advisory Council on the Employment of Women [PDF 231KB]
Pay deductions for partial strikes
Pay deductions for partial strikes to be reintroduced
Pay the greater of P*OWP and P*AWE12m Deduct portion of a week (P) from annual holidays balance Confirm date range Confirm day is an Otherwise Working Day Pay RDP or ADP Deduct days from balance (for sick and family violence leave) Lack of clarity about how to determine when a day is an Otherwise Working Day Unclear when RDP and ADP can be used. Unclear how to include commissions and overtime into RDP Lack of clarity about what constitutes a working week Lack of clarity about how to calcula te P Unclear how to incorporate commissions and overtime into OWP, when to use OWP averaging approach Calculate RDP (if possible, pay is constant) Calculate ADP (if RDP not possible, pay varies)
Pay the greater of P*OWP and P*AWE12m Deduct portion of a week (P) from annual holidays balance Confirm date range Confirm day is an Otherwise Working Day Pay RDP or ADP Deduct days from balance (for sick and family violence leave) Lack of clarity about how to determine when a day is an Otherwise Working Day Unclear when RDP and ADP can be used. Unclear how to include commissions and overtime into RDP Lack of clarity about what constitutes a working week Lack of clarity about how to calcula te P Unclear how to incorporate commissions and overtime into OWP, when to use OWP averaging approach Calculate RDP (if possible, pay is constant) Calculate ADP (if RDP not possible, pay varies) 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:05:11
Pay-as-you-go (‘PAYG’) annual holiday pay: Employees who meet either of two specific sets of criteria (i.e. are on a fixed -term arrangement for less than 12 months , or work on an intermittent or irregular basis ) can agree with their employer to be paid annual holiday pay on top of their gross earnings for each pay period, instead of receiving paid annual holida ys (provided that certain requirements are satisfied) (Section 28 of the Act ).
Paying out some of the annual holiday entitlement: This is commonly referred to as ‘cashing up’ some annual holidays. Employees can ask their employer to pay out up to a maximu m of one week of their minimum four -week annual holiday entitlement each entitlement year (instead of taking the time off as paid annual holidays). The employee must make the request for this pay out and the request must be in writing. Employers may have a policy against paying out (including in an applicable collective agreement), but even if they do not have such a policy they do not have to agree to a pay -out (Sections 28A to 28F of the Act ).
Payload owners by organisation type
Payload permitting summary for PROTOSAT-1.
Payload permitting summary for StriX-2.
Payload permitting summary for approved payload QPS-SAR-9.
Payloads approved for launch
Payloads are objects that are carried, placed, or intended to be carried or placed in outer space. Permits are required for payloads launched from New Zealand and for New Zealand payloads that are launched overseas.
Payloads launched from New Zealand must meet tests to ensure public safety, minimise potential to create orbital debris. They must also be consistent with international obligations, national security, and wider national interest.
Payloads of a size less than 1U - Operational Policy [PDF 336KB]
Payloads of a size less than 1U : Operational Policy 1.1 Purpose of this document This is the New Zealand Space Agency (NZSA ) policy relating to the consideration of applications for payload permits made under the Outer Space and High -altitude Activities Act 2017 (the Act) and in accordance with the Outer Space and High -altitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulations 2017 ( the Regulations ), where the proposed payload is of a size less than 1U (a unit of satellite volume equivalent to a 10cm cube). It sets out the approach that will be taken by the NZSA when assessing applications under the Act. 1.2 When to apply this policy This policy will be applied when assessing applications for: + Payload permit s + Overseas payload permit s 1.3 Relevant sections in the Act and Regulations The Act requires the Minister to be satisfied that the applicant has taken and will continue to take all reasonable steps to safely manage the operation of a payload and thro ugh an orbital debris mitigation plan (ODMP ) that the applicant has taken measures to minimise the risk of collision with debris. The relevant sections in the Act and the Regulations are: + 16(2) : Application for payload permit + 17(1)(b) : When payload permit may be granted + 33(1)(b) : When overseas payload permit may be granted + Regulation 13 : Requirements for orbital debris mitigation plan
Payloads that contribute to nuclear weapons programmes or capabilities.
Payloads to continue to be considered on a case-by-case basis.
Payloads where the intended end use is likely to cause serious or irreversible harm to the environment.
Payloads with the intended end use of harming, interfering with, or destroying other spacecraft, or space systems on Earth.
Payloads with the intended end use of supporting or enabling specific defence, security or intelligence operations that are contrary to government policy.
Payment for annual holidays and leave should be based on clear rules 19. The Taskforce proposed that annual holidays payments should be paid at the greater of a ‘short -run’ average weekly earnings over the last 4 or 13 weeks,2 a ‘long-run’ average weekly earnings over the last 52 weeks, and what the employee would have earned if they had been at work on the day(s) in question (referred to as ‘Ordinary Leave Pay’). FBAPS leave payments would be paid at the greater of the average hourly pay over the last 13 weeks3 or Ordinary Leave Pay.
Payment methodology consolidation
Payment methodology: In 2020, Cabinet accepted the Holidays Act Taskforce 's
Payment times are measured from when an invoice is entered into agencies financial systems. The majority of invoices received are entered into agency financial systems within 1 working day.
Payments such as penal rates and overtime rates would be included in the average hourly rate and apply to all hours on any da y, regardless of whether those rates wou ld have actually applied.
Pays $12.23 per week in levies
Pays $16.12 a week in levies
Pays $27.80 a week in levies
Peer-review conference proceedings
Peer-reviewed journal articles
Penalties for non-registration
People are at the core of the RSI system. Their skills, ideas and connections are vital to the creation, communication and application of knowledge. We want to ensure that people in the RSI workforce are supported to work to their full potential, in a system that supports their career development and overall wellbeing.
People are skilled and engaged in safe and fulfilling work
People can only receive six months of insurance payments every 18 months. This can be spread over multiple claims (using any unused financial support), and the 18 months begins from the first claim.
People can work part-time while receiving payments
People combining work with formal education
People concerned in business' management: Karthik Krishnamurthy (Director), Teo Bee Hoon (Director), Gerard Willsher (Director), Sharon Souproanuck
People concerned in business: Bryan Running, Neil Jamieson, Janette Lye, Jasmine Estelle George, Paul Bailey, Steven McIvor
People concerned in business: Dennis Welby and Sharon Welby
People concerned in business: Robin Alker (Director), Mark Christopher Brightwell (Director)
People leaders approving or declining flexible working proposals or arrangements must follow the appropriate procedures.
People leaders support, champion and role model flexible working for their teams and themselves.
People who hold or have previously held citizenship in a country listed on the NASA Designated Countries List are not eligible to apply for this scholarship. Please refer to the OIIR Export Control web page for the most up-to-date list.
People who hold resident visas are not able to operate or invest in a commercial sex business in New Zealand. If a resident visa holder operates or invests in such a business they are deemed to have breached the conditions of their visa and may become liable for deportation.
People who keep working while unwell are much less productive, and when it takes longer to recover, important skills can be lost.
People who wish to migrate permanently to New Zealand enter through 1 of the 3 residence streams of the New Zealand Residence Programme. These are the Skilled/Business Stream, Family stream and International/Humanitarian stream.
People will be encouraged and supported in their job search. In rare cases of a pattern of non-compliance, people will be given notice and time to meet their obligations. If they fail to do so, insurance payments may be temporarily stopped.
People will have the opportunity to have their say on the changes during the Select Committee process.
People working in New Zealand will pay insurance levies to support them if they lose their job.
People working multiple jobs are eligible if they lose a job that provides more than 20% of their income. Any payments will top up these workers to 80% of their previous income.
Periodic analysis of trends will identify any parts of the business where additional support may be required to enable flexible working.
Permanent employee: A person employed on an ongoing indefinit e basis.
Permanently reinstate the rights that allow fibre providers to access shared property to install fibre in certain circumstances and make minor adjustments to the rights to improve their effectiveness
Permits and licences for space activities
Permitting decision summary for StardustMe Limited's SD-5 to SD-29
Permitting decision summary: Research Trust of Victoria University of Wellington
Permitting decision summary: StardustMe Limited
Person concerned in business and contact person: Ben Norrie
Person concerned in business and contact person: Clinton John McInnes.
Person concerned in business and contact person: Gareth Foster
Person concerned in business and contact person: Joshua McLairn
Person concerned in business and contact person: Sandra Todd
Person concerned in the business' management: Frank Martin Janssen (Managing Director), Dagmar Anja Giradet (Director), Klaus Giradet (Director), Sibilla Anja Beate Giradet (Director), Raymond Goubitz (Director), Stephanie Katja Bertha McGill (Director), Antonia Barbara Elisabeth Wright (Director).
Person concerned in the business' management: Murray Bell, Elizabeth Bell
Personal characteristics, self-management, and interpersonal skills
Personal grievances: A threshold for unjustified dismissals
Personal grievances: A threshold for unjustified dismissals [PDF 230KB]
Personal grievances: Second order policy issues for an income threshold
Personal grievances: Second order policy issues for an income threshold [PDF 369KB]
Personal journeys of New Zealand researchers
Personalised interpreter training
Personnel and Resources 6
Peter Fraser New Zealand Māori Council (WAI2224 claimant)
Petroleum and Minerals Report 2012
Petroleum and Minerals report
Petroleum and minerals regulatory system
Ph: 03-434 1234 or 021 375792
Phase 1 Rural Broadband Initiative contracts
Phase 1 Rural Broadband Initiative open access requirements
Phase 1 Ultra-Fast Broadband Initiative
Phase 1 broadband initiative documents
Phase 1 deployment (completed)
Phase 1 was completed in June 2016 and provided new or improved broadband to over 300,000 rural households and businesses
Phase 1: February 2025 to June 2026
Phase 2 deployment (in progress)
Phase 2: July 2026 to June 2028
Phase 3: July 2028 to December 2031
Phased return to work i.e., employees gradually increasing their hours on returning from long-term leave; phased retirement i.e., employees gradually reducing their hours as they approach retirement; seasonal working i.e., to cover busy periods and job sharing i.e., splitting a role with another employee.
Phil has a long history of supporting startups to grow, including through his role as a founding partner at the venture capital fund Movac, which has invested in a number of successful New Zealand early-stage ventures. As the former Chair of the Angel Association New Zealand, he brings extensive experience in investment into startup firms and helping to guide their growth, as well as an awareness of wider international trends.
Phone interpreting service is available on-demand or pre-booked, and video translation service is available pre-booked.
Phone: +64 4 472 0030 or +64 4 917 0199
Phone: 06-367 9114 or 027-618 6435
Phone: 07-377 0606 or 021-0435 652
Photo credit: Camilla Stoddart
Photo credit: Daniel Wrench
Photo credit: Ola Thorsen, US Embassy
Physical Chemistry (CHEM203/303)
Physical Chemistry (CHEM605)
Physical address: 15 Stout Street, Wellington 6011
Physics of the Earth and Planets (PHYS209)
Pike River Recovery Agency
Pike River Recovery Agency annual reports
Pilot of modern slavery training modules for Pacific countries delayed due to COVID-19 restrictions.
Piripi Walker Nga Kaiwhakapūmau i Te Reo (WAI2224 claimant) ) )
Place of business: 2 Bernard Street, Two Mile Bay, Taupo 3330
Place of business: 21 Strathmore Avenue, Levin
Place of business: 30 Sir Woolf Fisher Drive, East Tamaki, Auckland
Place of business: 309 Rosebank Road, Avondale, Auckland, 1026
Place of business: 32 Botha Road, Penrose, Auckland
Place of business: 41 Havill Street, Palmerston North
Place of business: 47 Frye Crescent, Wanaka, 9305
Place of business: Chatham Islands (Pitt Island & Waitangi)
Place of business: Ground Floor, New Zealand Post House, 7 Waterloo Quay, Wellington 6011
Place of business: Level 1, 6 Johnsonville Road, Johnsonville, Wellington 6037
Place of business: Unit F, 55 Richard Pearce Drive, Auckland Airport, Manukau 2150
Plan implementation: roles, responsibilities, resources
Plan of action against forced labour, people trafficking and slavery
Plan of action against forced labour, people trafficking and slavery [PDF 664KB]
Plan of action implementation reports
Planned/existing event promotion budget
Planning for the safety case 5
Plant Variety Rights Act 1987 review
PlantTech Research Institute
Playing our part in the global immigration system, together with border partners to keep New Zealand safe.
Please contact the New Zealand Space Agency if you need help or have questions.
Please do not leave your computer unattended during the screen share session.
Please email any questions or comments about the briefing to the Employment, Education and Training Secretariat below.
Please email your thoughts and feedback to:
Please forward the survey on our behalf to your suppliers, customers and contacts in the New Zealand space and advanced aviation sectors.
Please note that all reports of migrant exploitation will be treated in the usual manner and participation in the research commissioned by MBIE does not guarantee any outcome in relation to a report of migrant exploitation.
Please note that this email address is not monitored for queries. Please send statements or enquiries to
Please note that you are not required to agree to sharing your screen with the Client Services Advisor and the call can proceed as normal.
Please note these reports are not an official part of the sectors report series, and statements or advice contained within do not necessarily reflect government policy.
Please note, any employment positions for the New Zealand Space Agency will be advertised on the careers website:
Please note: This content will change over time and can go out of date.
Please note: the dashboard is no longer being updated. The Regional Economic Activity web tool is an alternative source of labour market data.
Please reach out if you have any questions.
Please read and accept the terms & conditions to start your session
Please refer to the data dictionaries for more information on the Migrant Employment Data.
Please take the time to read this summary of the proposals for the New Zealand Income Insurance Scheme.
Please use this form for general enquiries and any feedback, including compliments, complaints, and suggestions. We are interested to know what MBIE is doing well and what you think MBIE can do to improve its services and delivery.
Please visit the Qualmark website for more information and to register your interest.
Plumbers, Gasfitters and Drainlayers Board
Plumbers, Gasfitters, and Drainlayers (Self-Contained Vehicles) Regulations 2023
Plumbers, gasfitters and drainlayers
Police plan to deliver awareness-raising training to all new Police recruits
Policy Advisor, Employment Standards Policy
Policy and Regulatory Capability
Policy design paper, following consultation.
Policy papers advising or seeking agreement from the Minister of Tourism on freedom camping policy decisions.
Policy work has begun to enable legislative change where needed. This includes to:
Policy, strategy and discussion papers
Positive outcomes from the project
Post Graduate Certificate/Diploma in Aerospace Engineering
Postal Address: P.O Box 1653, Taupo
Postal Deed of Understanding
Postal Services Act 1998 on the New Zealand legislation website
Postal Services Act and its associated regulations.
Postal address: 122B Centaurus Road, Christchurch
Postal address: 21 Strathmore Avenue, Levin
Postal address: 47 Frye Crescent, Wanaka, 9305
Postal address: DX CR59901
Postal address: PO Box 1233, Palmerston North
Postal address: PO Box 1473, Wellington 6140
Postal address: PO Box 201236, Auckland Airport, Manukau 2150
Postal address: PO Box 301240, Albany, Auckland 0752
Postal address: PO Box 31147, Milford, Auckland 0741
Postal address: PO Box 5024, Wellesley Street, Auckland 1141
Postal address: PO Box 65438, Mairangi Bay, Auckland 0754
Postal address: PO Box 83090, Johnsonville, Wellington
Postal address: Private Bag 39990, Wellington 5045
Postal address: Private Bag 93222, Parnell, Auckland 1151
Postal operators in New Zealand
Postal operators must comply with all relevant laws including transport, planning and tax laws. They are responsible for ensuring they comply with laws and regulations. If unsure, they should seek independent legal advice.
Postal operators must fulfil certain criteria and follow the provisions of the Postal Services Act.
Postal operators must mark mail they carry with a postal identifier, which is:
Postal outlets with additional postal services
Postal services in New Zealand
Postgraduate Diploma in Computing
Posting dangerous or objectionable material
Posts made by others to our social media channels are the responsibility of that person or organisation. They don't necessarily reflect the opinions or policy of our Ministry.
Powering Potential programme
Practical applications for the space sector could include biosensors, autonomous systems, or new materials that could organise or repair themselves automatically, which could be vital in spacecraft or in extraterrestrial environments, and would avoid the need for impractical traditional manufacturing infrastructure in space.
Practice Advisory 19: Improving earthquake performance of non-structural elements
Pre-COVID-19 our tourism forecasts provided expectations on the future tourism demand in New Zealand. Closure of the New Zealand border in early 2020 has made forecasting challenging and given the lack of data and uncertainty around international travel, we decided to halt it. When reliable data is readily available, we will look to resume forecasting.
Pre-COVID-19 our tourism forecasts provided expectations on the future tourism demand in New Zealand. Please bear this in mind when using this information.
Pre-requisite courses that are endorsed by NAATI as teaching and assessing the skills and knowledge required by the translating and interpreting profession are available on the NAATI website. The website is updated regularly.
Predicting future behaviour
Preferred option : Prescribe the minimum necessary information requirements An iterative application procedure ensures an efficient process whereby we seek the minimum information necessary with the ability to fast track applications that are low risk and have already satisfied the informat ion requirements through the provision of a foreign licence. It also enables us to seek additional information that may be required in a targeted way (although we note that this may increase the turnaround time .) Ensures that compliance costs are in line w ith international benchmarks for the level of risk . With the exception of HAVs, most of the operators seeking a New Zealand licence or permit will already require a US licence or authorisation fro m another foreign jurisdiction thus further reducing compli ance costs. A flexible and nimble approach to regulations permits the regime to adapt as our experience and knowledge of the industry grows and to evolve in line with international best practice .
Preliminary Proposal 1: Require Full and Final Settlement for Full Self Cover
Preparing all young people for satisfying and rewarding working lives Long-Term Insights Briefing
Preparing for 5G in New Zealand
Present their research on stage or through poster sessions, and
Prevent exploitation from escalating through policy and operational responses
Prevent the occurrence of workplace (and other) conditions that might enable temporary migrant worker exploitation
Preventing Financial Hardship Caused by the use of Buy-Now, Pay-Later
Previous Economic Development work
Previous Strategic Intentions / Statements of Intent
Previous deployment updates
Previous intern experiences
Previous international tourism forecasts
Previous non-departmental appropriations reports
Previous plans and reports
Previously, Robert was Head of Investment Management at Provincial Development Unit (PDU), the team responsible for detailed assessments, analysis, and critiquing of all funding applications, and making recommendations to decision-makers.
Pricing information is only available to eligible government agencies. You will need to complete a Confidentiality Deed:
Primary Growth Partnership:
Prime Minister's Science Prizes
Prime Minister's Space Prizes
Principal Advisor, Employment Standards Policy
Principles for managing complaints
Principles that underpin a flexible-by-default approach
Prior to COVID-19, MBIE commissioned 2 research pieces on domestic tourism trends to inform future decision-making. Read these at the links below:
Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, tourism was one of our largest and fastest growing sectors.
Prior to the legislation coming into force, the Government had an agreement with Rocket Lab USA Inc. and Rocket Lab NZ authorising their launch activity from New Zealand.
Prior to the screen share session beginning, the Client Services Advisor will make a clear statement asking for your agreement to share your screen. Please do not begin the session until you have provided your express verbal agreement and have been given an opportunity to close any windows on your screen that you do not want to be seen by the Client Services Advisor. The screen recording will begin once your screen has been shared.
Prior to this, Melanie held a number of roles leading policy teams responsible for competition, consumer, economic regulation and corporate governance policy at the Ministry of Economic Development.
Priority will be given to those applications that can demonstrate:
Privacy Commissioner's website
Privacy of natural persons
Privacy statement for the Telephone/Video Interpreting Service
Private Investigators for Regulatory Activities [PDF 4.7MB]
Proactive and sophisticated risk management
Proactive release of papers
Proactive release of payload permit summaries:
Proactive release of policy advice on Fair Pay Agreements
Proactively released documents
Problems with the website
Procedure for submissions on trade agreements
Process Heat in New Zealand
Process for considering national interests - payload permit applications
Process to launch a payload
Producing Technical Capability and Intended End Use document:
Productive, sustainable and inclusive growth
Productivity Commission Inquiry
Professional interpreters allow communication between government agencies and culturally and linguistically diverse people. Professional interpreters abide by high ethical standards and may specialise in certain areas, such as health or legal services.
Professor Aidan Byrne (Chair)
Professor Byrne is Provost at the University of Queensland and was previously the Chief Executive of the Australian Research Council. Professor Byrne completed a BSc and MSc degrees at the University of Auckland. He completed a PhD in Nuclear Physics at the Australian National University, where he later served as Director of College of Physical and Mathematical Sciences and Dean of Science. Professor Byrne spent over 2 years in Bonn, Germany as a von Humboldt fellow and is a fellow of the Australian Institute of Physics.
Professor Eason completed a PhD from the University of Surrey in the UK, after which he specialised in the development of new cardiovascular pharmaceuticals. He was awarded Companion of the Royal Society of New Zealand in 2016, the Thomson Medal for research leadership in 2018, Companion of the New Zealand Order of Merit in 2019 for his services to science and wildlife conservation and Fellow of the Royal Society 2021.
Professor Emily Parker (Chair), Ferrier Research Institute, Departmental Science Advisor MBIE
Professor Hugh Blair, Board Member of Focus Genetics (sheep and beef breeding), New Zealand Animal Evaluation Limited (NZAEL), Dairy Genetics, Science Advisor to NBRYO Australia
Professor Long is Director of the Robinson Research Institute at Victoria University of Wellington. He completed his PhD in Physics at the University of Southern California, Los Angeles and joined IRL, the predecessor to the Robinson Research Institute, in 1994.
Professor Margaret Brimble
Professor Richard Blaikie, Deputy Vice Chancellor Research and Enterprise of University of Otago, is chair of NSOG. Members of the group come from a range of organisations from across the research, science, and innovation sector and represent a variety of skills, expertise, and interests. Terms of Reference for NSOG can be found here:
Professor of Aerospace Engineering and Director of the Aerospace Research Institute, University of Canterbury
Professor of Environmental Planning, University of Waikato
Professor of Musicology, University of Auckland
Programme funding recipients
Progress for fixing the Holidays Act 2003
Progress report: December 2022
Progress towards identifying potential earthquake-prone buildings
Progressing our broader space interests
Progression of negotiations between OT and [X] (Please note that the name of the country is being withheld due to sensitivity of the negotiations) towards a bilateral agreement to safeguard children being moved across borders, included a roundtable discussion in July 2021.
Prohibit certain business with sanctioned countries
Prohibits arbitrary or unlawful interference with privacy
Prohibits military or any other hostile use of environmental modification techniques having widespread, long-lasting or severe effects as the means of destruction, damage or injury, including in space
Project Co-lead, MethaneSAT and Chief Scientist at Environmental Defense Fund
Project Hau Nuku: Weather forecasting system review
Projects are co-funded in partnership with local councils (or community organisations with council support) and each round of the Tourism Infrastructure Fund has a different funding priorities statement. In 2022, for the first time, the Fund considered infrastructure projects to support the delivery and management of Matariki events to mark the first year of the new public holiday.
Projects funded by the IVL
Prolonged or repeated exposure to limited employment has negative impacts on youth wellbeing and can have significant long-term consequences. This is a complex policy challenge with multi-generational consequences.
Promote inclusive work so everyone has opportunities to participate in meaningful and fulfilling work.
Promoted important cases responding to serious non-compliance with employment law, including an Alcohol and Regulatory Licencing Authority decision to refuse a liquor licence due to poor employment practices.
Promoting financial literacy and capability in Pacific communities
Promoting global trade and investment
Promoting sustainable space and Earth environments
Promoting the responsible uses of space internationally
Property access for telecommunications
Proportion of delivery points that can be communal
Proposal 1: Implement new health and safety assessment requirements
Proposal 2: Strengthen the assessment of Claims and Injury Management
Proposal 3: Performance Monitoring
Proposal 4: New pricing options for the Partnership Discount Plan
Proposal for Change - Business and Consumer
Proposal for Change - Business and Consumer [PDF 1.9MB]
Proposal for Change - Consumer Advocacy Council Secretariat
Proposal for Change - Consumer Advocacy Council Secretariat [PDF 412KB]
Proposal for Change - Enhancing MBIE Property Services
Proposal for Change - Enhancing MBIE Property Services [PDF 827KB]
Proposal for Change - MBIE Foundations for the Future
Proposal for Change - MBIE Foundations for the Future [PDF 3MB]
Proposal for Change - MBIE Intelligence Re-alignment
Proposal for Change - MBIE Intelligence Re-alignment [PDF 863KB]
Proposal to develop an Electronic Travel Authority [PDF 6.4MB]
Proposal to develop and Electronic Travel Authority - Minute of Decision [PDF 177KB]
Proposals can include pilot/prototype work.
Proposals for most Pillar 2 actions are made by multinational research consortia with partners from a minimum of 3 EU Member States or Associated Countries (note that these are minimum criteria, and most proposals include additional partners).
Proposals should include commentary on the following criteria:
Proposals to address problems with wheel clamping - Cabinet minute [PDF 142KB]
Proposals to address problems with wheel clamping - Cabinet paper [PDF 114KB]
Proposed 2025/26 levy rate
Proposed 2026/27 levy rate
Proposed 2027/28 levy rate
Proposed Accident Compensation Appeal Tribunal
Proposed Intellectual Property Laws Amendment Bill
Proposed amendments to the BuiltReady Scheme Rules public consultation
Proposed changes for Chinese medicine
Proposed changes for audiometrists
Proposed changes for paramedics
Proposed changes to Deed of Understanding
Proposed gap analysis template [PDF 227KB]
Proposed minor change to nurse definition
Proposed updates to the non-notifiable and notifiable risk tiers, and
Proposed weather forecasting system review and options
Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines
Prosecution action is one of a number of possible responses that may be used by MBIE in respect of criminal conduct within the areas that it regulates. It is a significant enforcement tool that must be used in a deliberate and targeted manner.
Prosecution decision maker
Prosecution decision makers must consider each case on its own merits when making the decision to prosecute.
Prosecution procedure and guidelines
Prospective postal operators must provide the following information:
Prosperous and adaptable people, sectors and regions
Protect temporary migrant workers in New Zealand and enable them to leave exploitative employment
Protecting New Zealand's energy infrastructure
Protecting the Intellectual Property of Indigenous Media
Protecting vulnerable workers
Protects the financial value of transferred entitlements for employees who may transfer on terms and conditions less than their existing terms and conditions.
Provi di ng an implementation period to support the transition to a new Act
Provide a detailed submission through the Have Your Say section of our website
Provide advice identifying medium to long-term work to reduce persistent disadvantage.
Provide for the effective and efficient delivery of support services to victims
Provide transparent and reliable labour market indicators to show occupational and other skills information. (TEC/MBIE)
Provide transparent, future-focussed and accessible careers information and advice aligning work and learning pathways to skills, supporting students and workers to make informed decisions. (TEC)
Provides a clear framework to support transfer of entitlements when it is negotiated.  The legal framework would provide for the common practice of including the transfer of leave entitlements as part of negotiations.
Provides advice and support to business groups relating to the provision and procurement of legal services in accordance with the Legal Services policy
Provides for transfer and protection of sensitive US technology
Provides information on national employment by industry, occupation, and regional employment for Pacific Peoples.
Provides information on resolving problems related to building and construction
Provides quarterly reporting on policy compliance to the Compliance Centre of Excellence
Provides requested advice and seek your decision regarding options for the future of Callaghan Innovation
Provides rules applicable to armed conflict
Provides the history of the decisions and future options relating to Callaghan Innovation
Providing accurate, relevant and clear information.
Providing flexible working arrangement documentation.
Providing greater certainty for contracting parties [PDF 1.2MB]
Providing guidance regarding this policy to people leaders.
Providing more tailored pricing options for AEs.
Providing transitional support to R&D performing businesses [PDF 268KB]
Providing, taking, and paying
Provincial Growth Fund tourism
Provincial Growth Fund tourism funding
Provision of these services does not imply any guarantee that the support representative will be successful in problem resolution, and MBIE accepts no liability in this connection.
Psycho-social (or mental well-being) support
Public Perceptions of Immigration Survey
Public Research Organisations
Public Service Commission guide on integrity and conduct
Public consultation on proposals to address modern slavery and worker exploitation in operations and supply chains.
Public consultation on proposed legislation to address modern slavery and worker exploitation in operations and supply chains undertaken from 8 April to 7 June 2022. A submissions report was published on the MBIE website in September.
Public perceptions of immigration survey 2023: Summary report [PDF 2.3MB]
Public sector boards perform important governance functions, which means the recruitment process usually takes longer than a standard job vacancy.
Public sector financial resource code sets
Publications and technical papers
Publicly provided income insurance is a new concept for New Zealand, but we do have a similar system for accidents: ACC. We propose that the New Zealand Income Insurance Scheme is funded and managed in a similar way.
Publish a refreshed Child and Youth Strategy.
Publish relevant cases of serious non-compliance with immigration law, to build greater consumer awareness of modern slavery.
Published Official Information Act requests
Publishing an Employment Action Plan
Purchase order terms of purchase
Purpose of standards and accreditation
Purpose of the consultation
Putting out the welcome mat - A resource for developing your welcoming plan - January 2018 [PDF 2.4MB]
Qualifications held by our workforce
Qualifications that can help
Quality Assurance (completed by QA panel) Reviewing Agency: The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment . Panel Assessment & Comment : MBIE’s Regulatory Impact Analysis Review Panel has reviewed the attached Impact Statement prepared by MBIE. The panel considers that the information and analysis summarised in the Impact Statement meets the criteria necessary for Ministers to make informed decisions on the proposals in this paper. The panel notes the technical nature of the proposed changes and the intention to consult. It will be important for the consultation document to set out the issues in a clear and accessible way.
Quality Assurance Assessment: MBIE’s Regulatory Impact Analysis Review Panel has reviewed the attached Impact Statement prepared by MBIE. The Panel considers that the information and analysis summarised in the Impact Statement partially meets the criteria necessary for Ministers to make informed decisions on the proposals in this paper. This is because the second option (accrual -based system for annual holidays) has not been analysed to the same extent as the first option as it was dismissed r elatively early by the Taskforce, despite their early consultation indicating wide support for the second option, particularly by employers. There has been limited time for analysis or consultation post-Taskforce to better understand the impacts of the sec ond option and so it is difficult to compare the options on a like -for-like basis. Reviewer Comments and Recommendations:
Quality data and information informs strategic direction, sets investment priorities and improves business decision-making. On this page you can find information and data on the science and innovation sector.
Qualmark received $5 million to establish a free advisory service to support tourism businesses as they navigate the impacts of COVID-19. The Tourism Advisory Support Service is available to provide advice to businesses on things like how to transition their business for the domestic market, strategy development, and moving in and out of hibernation.
Quantium Solutions New Zealand Pty Ltd
Quarterly Labour Market Report
Quarterly Labour Market Scorecard
Quarterly connectivity update Q1 to 31 March 2022 [PDF 6.6MB]
Quarterly connectivity update Q2 to 30 June 2022 [PDF 6.9MB]
Quarterly connectivity update Q3 to 30 September 2022
Quarterly connectivity update: Q1 to 31 March 2019 [PDF 4MB]
Quarterly connectivity update: Q1 to 31 March 2020 [PDF 7.2MB]
Quarterly connectivity update: Q1 to 31 March 2021 [PDF 7.3MB]
Quarterly connectivity update: Q2 to 30 June 2019 [PDF 9.2MB]
Quarterly connectivity update: Q2 to 30 June 2020 [PDF 8.9MB]
Quarterly connectivity update: Q2 to 30 June 2021 [PDF 7.9MB]
Quarterly connectivity update: Q3 to 30 September 2019 [PDF 9.1MB]
Quarterly connectivity update: Q3 to 30 September 2020 [PDF 5.9MB]
Quarterly connectivity update: Q3 to 30 September 2021 [PDF 6.7MB]
Quarterly connectivity update: Q4 to 31 December 2019 [PDF 8.3MB]
Quarterly connectivity update: Q4 to 31 December 2020 [PDF 5.8MB]
Quarterly connectivity update: Q4 to 31 December 2021 [PDF 7.6MB]
Quarterly labour market report
Quarterly release data files
Quarterly updates on broadband deployment
Queen Elizabeth II Memorial Day
Queen Elizabeth II Memorial Day Bill passes into law
Queen Elizabeth II Memorial Day is to be treated as
Queen Elizabeth II Memorial Day will be considered a non-working day for statutory and contractual provisions, where these express timeframes with reference to working days. September 26 is also South Canterbury Anniversary Day. Under s44 Holidays Act 2003, when 2 public holidays fall on the same day, employees only get 1 day off.
Queenstown Lakes District
Queenstown Lakes District Council
Queenstown Lakes Economic Transformation and Resilience Fund
Questions about the consultation
Questions for Submitters: Cost recovery structure 1 What is your view on a mixed cost recovery structure of fees (for specific services) and levies (for fixed shared costs), and the types of costs allocated to fees and levies? 2 Are there any other options you would like to see considered to recover shared costs from users? Levies Companies Office (CO) levy 3 What is your view on who should be charged the CO levy and the type of shared costs the levy will recover? 4 What impact will paying an annual levy of $15.00 have on your business or organisation? New Zealand Business Number (NZBN) levy 5 What is your view on who should be charged the NZBN levy and the costs the levy will recover? 6 What impact will paying an annual levy of $12.00 have on your business or organisation? Fees by register All registers 7 What impact would the proposed total charge have on your business or organisation? 8 Are there any adjustments to the proposed fees(s) that you think should be reconsidered? If yes, which fee(s) and why? 9 Do you think the reasons for proposed adjustments to the fee(s) are clear and understandable? If not, why not? Incorporated Societies register 10 What effect would the proposed total charge have on your organisation? 11 Are there any adjustments to the proposed fees(s) that you think should be reconsidered? If yes, which fee(s) and why? 12 Do you think the reasons for proposed adjustments to the fee(s) are clear and understandable? If not, why not?
Questions for consultation
Questions for submitters on proposals to any or all registers: 7 What impact would the proposed total charge have on your business or organisation? 8 Are there any adjustments to the proposed fees(s) that you think should be reconsidered? If yes, which fee(s) and why? 9 Do you think the reasons for proposed adjustments to the fee(s) are clear and understandable? If not, why not?
Quick guide: how to navigate GCDR tools and resources
R E S T R I C T E D EGI-16-MIN-0051 Cabinet Economic Growth and Infrastructure Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act 1982, by persons with the appropriate authority. Scope of Space Policy and Lead Space Agency Portfolios Economic Development / Science and Innovation On 6 April 2016, the Cabinet Economic Growth and Infrastructure Committee: Background 1 noted that Rocket Lab’s intention to establish a commercial satellite launch business in New Zealand has meant that a space policy and regulatory capability is rapidly developing to meet New Zealand’s obligations as a launch State, and to manage the safety and security issues arising from frequent launches; 2 noted that a space policy capability will enable New Zealand to capitalise on emerging economic opportunities, advance New Zealand’s interests in space, manage international obligations, and assist in developing international arrangements to ensure the responsible use of space; 3 noted that on 2 December 2015, the Cabinet Economic Growth and Infrastructure Committee (EGI): 3.1 approved the high-level design of a regulatory regime to enable space launches from New Zealand, with legislation to be enacted during 2016; 3.2 directed officials to report back with further advice on the scope of space policy and on space agencies; [EGI-15-MIN-0175] Space policy scope and guiding objectives 4 noted that the scope of space policy: 4.1 encompasses the totality of New Zealand’s interests in space, including economic development, national security, foreign policy, safety and the environment; 4.2 includes space launch, satellites, satellite applications and technologies operating at very high altitudes; 1 R E S T R I C T E D 7yr8upqmdi 2016-04-08 09:34:23 Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act R E S T R I C T E D EGI-16-MIN-0051 5 noted that the proposed guiding objectives for space policy are to: 5.1 facilitate the development of a safe and responsible space industry, including managing effects on Earth, in space and on other users; 5.2 promote the use of satellite and very high altitude vehicle applications; 5.3 ensure the equitable, efficient and sustainable access to satellite orbits and radio spectrum resources used for space services; 5.4 preserve and advance New Zealand’s position in space and access to space capabilities; 5.5 ensure New Zealand’s international rights and obligations in the use of space are met, and that the government’s liabilities as a launching State are managed adequately; 5.6 enhance and protect national security; Space agency’s functions and form 6 noted that in order to meet the objectives outlined in paragraph 5 above, a lead space policy agency will have the following functions: 6.1 policy advice, including: 6.1.1 research, information gathering, monitoring and evaluation, and strategic planning; 6.1.2 ongoing risk assessment and advice on how the government can manage its liability associated with being a launching State in the context of a rapidly evolving commercial market, and the development of strategies to manage this liability and pass it on to the space launch and payload operators; 6.2 develop and maintain (jointly with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade) New Zealand’s international relationships and international obligations for space (Defence will continue to manage military-to-military relationships); 6.3 domestic coordination of information and advice across the various policy dimensions (this is likely to be a significant part, e.g. up to 80 percent, of the policy advice function); 7 noted that the draft legislation establishes the following regulatory functions: 7.1 authorisation of space launches, payloads and satellites; 7.2 national security considerations; 7.3 registration of space objects; 7.4 monitoring and enforcement; 7.5 accident investigation; 7.6 designation of secure areas; 2 R E S T R I C T E D 7yr8upqmdi 2016-04-08 09:34:23 Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act R E S T R I C T E D EGI-16-MIN-0051 7.7 issuing of security cards; 7.8 education, information and guidance for industry participants; 8 agreed that the nature and scale of the proposed space policy and regulatory functions does not justify the establishment of a standalone agency; 9 agreed that the space policy functions be located within an existing agency based on the best strategic fit and alignment with existing mandate and capability; 10 agreed that the authorisation functions are closely associated with the policy grounds for assessing a license application, and that these functions should be kept with the lead space policy agency; 11 agreed that a domestic cross-agency coordination committee be established to integrate space policy advice across the range of agencies with space interests, and that the space policy agency will provide a secretariat for the committee; 12 noted that the two candidates to lead space policy are the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) and the Ministry of Transport; 13 noted that either MBIE or the Ministry of Transport could be the primary agency for the space regulatory functions, but that in practice different regulatory agencies will be involved in different regulatory functions and that this is being worked through as part of the implementation work stream that MBIE has commenced; 14 agreed that: 14.1 space launches and space applications have a broad economic development and innovation focus that extends into many areas of the economy and society; 14.2 this, along with the need to maintain momentum in the development of the proposed space legislation, means that MBIE is best placed to be the lead space policy agency for an initial period of three years; 15 agreed that: 15.1 the location of the lead space policy agency be reconsidered as part of the required review of the proposed Space Activities Act (three years after the legislation is enacted); 15.2 the review will take into account developments in international space law and space policy, as well as any changes to the civil aviation regime; 16 directed the lead space policy agency to report back to the responsible Minister: 16.1 in June 2016, with advice on a domestic coordination mechanism to provide Ministers with integrated and cohesive advice on space policy; 16.2 in October 2016, with advice on a New Zealand space policy, including an assessment of opportunities for New Zealand from satellite applications and a strategy to exploit their utilisation; Financial implications 17 noted that when the proposed legislation is enacted, licensing fees on industry participants will be used to recover the costs associated with the regulatory functions; 3 R E S T R I C T E D 7yr8upqmdi 2016-04-08 09:34:23 Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act R E S T R I C T E D EGI-16-MIN-0051 18 agreed that until the proposed legislation is enacted, the costs associated with developing and implementing the regulatory regime shall be absorbed within agency baselines, as the process involves a degree of capability building by agencies and there are public good reasons for meeting these costs from Crown funding; 19 agreed that the ongoing costs associated with space policy work be met from Crown funding; 20 noted that a dedicated space policy capability (including the licensing function) and that any budgetary pressures associated with MBIE or the Ministry of Transport taking on these functions will be addressed as part of that agency’s four year plan in the 2017 Budget; Legislative implications 21 noted that the Space Activities Bill has a category 2 priority on the 2016 Legislation Programme (to be passed in 2016); 22 noted that officials will report back to EGI as soon as possible to seek final policy approvals to enable the proposed legislation to be introduced into the House in May 2016. Suzanne Howard Committee Secretary Present: Officials present from: Rt Hon John Key Hon Bill English (Chair) Hon Gerry Brownlee Hon Steven Joyce Hon Paula Bennett Hon Amy Adams Hon Simon Bridges Hon Michael Woodhouse Hon Maggie Barry Hon Craig Foss Hon Jo Goodhew Hon Nicky Wagner Hon Louise Upston Hon Paul Goldsmith Hon Te Ururoa Flavell Hon Peter DunneOffice of the Prime Minister Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet Officials Committee for EGI 4 R E S T R I C T E D 7yr8upqmdi 2016-04-08 09:34:23 s 9(2)(f)(iv) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act
R escind the decision to introduce a require ment for
RBAs trained prior to the emergency event were well-prepared for their role and felt well-managed by their immediate team leader in the field
REANNZ (Research & Education Advanced Network NZ Ltd)
REANNZ is the not-for-profit Crown-owned company that owns and operates a high-speed, unrestricted broadband network for the New Zealand education, research and innovation communities.
REPF funding for additional promotion
REPF funding should not be used to substitute the existing promotional budget. It is to enhance the amount available for promotional purposes.
RESTRICTED Office of the Minister for Economic Development and Science and Innovation Chair, Cabinet Economic Growth and Infrastructure Committee Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Bill: Final Policy Decisions Proposal 1.This paper provides further advice on issues that have arisen during the development of a regulatory regime for commercial space launches from New Zealand, including:  a proposal to include certain very high altitude (‘near space’) activities within the scope of the regulatory regime;  the decision-making process for issuing a national security certificate (which has the effect of vetoing the proposed activity);  the offences and penalties regime under the Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act (the Act); and  confirmation that the review of the Act after three years will be a legislative requirement. Executive Summary 2.In December 2015, Cabinet approved the high-level design of a regulatory regime to enable commercial space launches and the operation of payloads (e.g. satellites) from New Zealand. During the development of the legislation, a small number of policy issues have arisen that require Cabinet approval in order to finalise the proposed legislation. The inclusion of high altitude activities within the scope of the proposed space regime 3.New technologies are being developed to operate at very high altitudes (from about 100km down to the normal operating altitudes of aircraft, an area often referred to as ‘near space’). Some of these technologies perform similar functions to satellites. The advice from officials from the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE), the Ministry of Transport, Defence and Security agencies, including relevant officials from the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, is that certain high altitude activities should be included within the scope of the proposed space regime. This will ‘future proof’ the legislation for advances in technology and ensure that different technologies that perform similar functions are treated consistently. It will also ensure that New Zealand is well positioned to control high altitude activities that originate from New Zealand. 4.The group of officials referred to above have discussed the appropriate lower limit to apply to the high altitude regime and recommend that it be set with reference to flight level 600 (this is currently the altitude that is the upper limit of controlled airspace and is approximately 18kms above ground level). This reference point emphasises the connection with the civil aviation regime and the intended continuity between the two regimes. 5.The Minister responsible for the administration of the proposed Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act (the responsible Minister) will have the ability to exempt or exclude (as may be appropriate) specified (classes) of high altitude vehicles which undertake activities 1 7yr8upqmdi 2016-06-08 10:26:43 Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act RESTRICTED that are not intended to be subject to the high altitude regulatory regime, and are otherwise regulated as appropriate under aviation legislation and regulations. The decision-making process for issuing a national security certificate 6.Cabinet has agreed that serious national security concerns associated with the application for a space licence, or with the operation of a space object, will result in the issue of a national security certificate (which will act as a veto on the proposed activity). 7.The Minister in Charge of the NZSIS and Responsible for the GCSB and I would like to propose a new model for managing national security considerations for the proposed Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Act. The core elements of the model are described below:  The national security Minister(s) would be consulted as part of the decision- making process on the proposed activity.  The nature and significance of the risk and extent to which it can be mitigated would be taken into account in the decision-making process (both Ministers can agree on the mitigations that should be imposed).  In the event that either Minister believes a launch should not proceed, the matter is referred to the specified group of Ministers designated by the Prime Minister.  The Minister in Charge of the NZSIS and Responsible for the GCSB can issue a certificate vetoing the activity, with the agreement of the specified group of Ministers. 8. Offences and penalties regime 9.I propose an offence and penalty regime to deter conduct that could cause serious harm (such as damage to people, property and the environment) or that could breach New Zealand’s international obligations, including our obligations under the Technology Safeguards Agreement with the United States. 10.The proposed offences and penalties are based on the closest domestic analogues including the Civil Aviation Act 1990 (e.g. for licensing offences such as launching or procuring the launch of a space object without a licence) and the trade secrets offences under the Crimes Act (e.g. for offences relating to ‘interference with space objects’). 11.For serious licensing offences, I propose that there be a power to arrest offenders and, if necessary, to extradite them back to New Zealand. This requires serious offences to be eligible for a term of imprisonment (not less than one year). The Civil Aviation Act provides for an additional financial penalty of three times the value of any commercial gain resulting from a licensing offence where the offence was committed for financial benefit. The same approach is proposed under this regime. 2 7yr8upqmdi 2016-06-08 10:26:43 s 9(2)(f)(iv) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act RESTRICTED Review of the Act 12.Cabinet has agreed that there will be a review of the Act three years after its enactment. I propose that this review be a requirement in the legislation as this will create certainty that the review will be undertaken and provide assurance that, since the legislation has some novel elements, there is a clear process to review and adjust these elements as required. Background 13.New Zealand has certain natural advantages as a space launch location due to our clear skies and seas, and access to particular launch angles. New Zealand’s status as a responsible international citizen with trusted security partners is also an important enabler for space launches to take place from New Zealand. We already have one highly innovative company, Rocket Lab, located here and intending to launch from New Zealand. This positions New Zealand at the threshold of exciting new developments associated with low cost rocket launches and the placement of small satellites in space. 14.The Government is putting in place a modern and internationally credible regulatory framework to enable space activities to be located in New Zealand. The regulatory framework will mean that we can be part of these exciting new developments whilst ensuring that they are in the national interest. 15.In December 2015, Cabinet approved the high-level design of a regulatory regime to enable commercial space launches from New Zealand and the operation of payloads (e.g. satellites) in outer space in order to: facilitate the development of safe, secure and responsible space activities; implement New Zealand’s international obligations for space activities (including United Nations outer space treaties and the proposed Technology Safeguards Agreement); and to manage New Zealand’s liability that may arise from space launches (EGI 15 Min 0175 refers). 16.The legislation will establish a licensing regime (an overarching licence to launch a space object with a permitting regime for specific payloads such as satellites, with specific requirements implemented through licence conditions) to enable the Government to control the launch and operation of space objects from New Zealand. This is consistent with international practice for commercial space activities legislation. 17.Cabinet also authorised a group of Ministers to have power to act to make decisions on the detail of the legislation consistent with the policy framework in the Cabinet paper. During the subsequent development of the legislation, a small number of policy issues have arisen that have broader implications for the content of the regulatory regime and therefore require further Cabinet consideration. These are: a proposal to include certain very high altitude (‘near space’) activities within the scope of the space regime; the decision-making process for the issue of a national security certificate (which has the effect of a veto on the proposed activity); 3 7yr8upqmdi 2016-06-08 10:26:43 Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act RESTRICTED the offences and penalties regime under the new Act; and a proposal that the review of the new regulatory regime after three years be a legislative requirement. Comment Including high altitude activities within the space activities regulatory regime 18.Developments in technology are enabling new types of operating systems to be deployed in ‘near space’ (from about 100km down to the normal operating altitudes of aircraft). These systems (including high altitude balloons, high altitude drones and pseudo-satellites) are being developed by commercial and military interests to carry out similar functions to satellites1, including earth observation, border surveillance, maritime control and internet connectivity. A recent example of such an experimental activity is NASA’s super pressure balloon, which took flight from New Zealand in recent months to undertake scientific experiments. As these technologies develop, they have the potential to become a popular choice for certain scientific missions that would otherwise require more expensive rocket launches. 19.While the use of high altitude vehicles operating in near space for these types of applications is still developing, military and civil utilisation of this zone is increasing with the consequent need to address issues such as national security and safety. Operations in near space are a potential hazard for air traffic and for the public in the case of technology failures or malfunctions. 20.The safety aspects of such systems if they are aircraft (including balloons and drones) are regulated under the Civil Aviation Act 1990 (the CA Act). However, the CA Act has a focus on the promotion of aviation safety and does not take account of national security and national interest requirements. 21.The establishment of a legal regime for high altitude activities will ensure that New Zealand is well positioned to control these activities in future as technological advances and circumstances require. It will also benefit private entities by providing regulatory certainty and a consistent legal framework for investment in experimental technologies. 22.The key design questions associated with how best to regulate very high altitude activities include: which regulatory regime should apply to high altitude activities – the (new) space activities regime, or the (revised) civil aviation regime; and determining the appropriate lower limit to apply to a high altitude regime. Which regulatory regime should apply to high altitude activities? 23.The two candidates for a high altitude regime are the proposed Outer Space Activities Act or the civil aviation regime (the CA Act is currently under review). Officials from MBIE, the Ministry of Transport, the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, and Defence and security agencies have discussed the options and consider that the proposed space regime is the best fit for regulating certain high altitude activities. 1 Although there is no legal definition of Outer Space, this is generally accepted as the area extending beyond 100km above Earth, beyond which the atmosphere will not support an aircraft operating below orbital speed. 4 7yr8upqmdi 2016-06-08 10:26:43 s 9(2)(f)(iv) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act RESTRICTED 24.The objectives of the proposed space regulatory regime (including economic development and innovation, and managing risks to safety, security and the environment) are equally applicable to activities in near space as they are to activities in outer space. Extending the scope of the space regime to include certain high altitude activities does not significantly alter the costs or benefits associated with establishing the new regime. Moreover, the development of a high altitude regime as part of the proposed space regime will ensure that different technologies providing similar functions are regulated consistently regardless of the altitude at which they operate. This will help ‘future proof’ the space regime for developments in technology. 25.The civil aviation regime already applies to all aircraft regardless of altitude, but it is predominantly focused on safety of New Zealand’s air transport services and does not enable regulation on national security or national interest grounds. 26.The inclusion of certain high altitude activities within the proposed space activities regime will mean that: payloads that New Zealand authorities deem capable of being operated at very high altitudes (i.e. near space) are within the scope of the space regime; and high-altitude vehicles (i.e. the carrier systems that New Zealand authorities deem capable of taking payloads up into the high altitude region) are also within the scope of the proposed space regime, but (if they are aircraft), the safety aspects of their operation will still be addressed through established Civil Aviation Authority procedures. 27.
RRI Performance Framework
RSABs aim to improve regulatory systems by ensuring that they are effective, efficient and align with best regulatory practice. The amendments in these Bills achieve this by:
RTA Awareness and Compliance Research 2018: (Gravitas) Qualitative report Gravitas
RTA Monitoring Awareness of Changes to Insulation and Smoke Alarm Requirements - 2018 survey
RTA Monitoring Awareness of Changes to Insultation and Smoke Alarm Requirements - 2017 monitoring report
RTOs should use this application template. Email your completed application to
RWPs and Local Insight Reports (LIRs) produced by the RSLGs are still available and can be accessed below. Local insights reports provide on-the ground qualitative and quantitative information on regional labour markets and skills.
Radiation Safety Act 2016
Radio Spectrum Management
Radio Spectrum Management website
Radiocommunications Act 1989
Radiocommunications Act and its associated regulations.
Radiocommunications Regulations 2001
Raise a concern or provide feedback
Raising workplace productivity and wages
Range of datasets on the New Zealand economy, by sector, with data from MBIE and Stats New Zealand
Rapid building assessments
Rapid building assessments are completed by teams led by the local territorial authority. Rapid Building Assessors (RBAs) are deployed to assess damaged buildings, including existing or potential hazards. They then record details of the damage and assign appropriate placards to buildings to identify how they can be used.
Rather than supporting workers to remain attached to their current jobs, as the Government did throughout COVID-19, we need policies that provide economic security to the individual directly and support them to transition into new work, regardless of the source of their displacement.
Rationalisation, alignment and coordination
Rauemi tautoko - support resources
Rautaki mo te Taurikura [PDF 2.8MB]
Re sc ind the decision to introduce a
Re-testing is not required and it is strongly recommended that New Zealand Interpreters join the New Zealand Society for Translators and Interpreters to keep abreast of developments in the sector and opportunities to seek professional development.
Reaching out to your networks in Europe as early as possible to find partners and build your consortium
Read Simon Murdoch's report:
Read Weather Permitting: Review of open access to weather data in New Zealand
Read a complete list of all CWPAs that can request or share information under the Oranga Tamariki Act 1989:
Read a snapshot of how this support has made a difference to Kiwi businesses:
Read a summary of the New Zealand Income Insurance scheme.
Read about our consultation on Disclosure of origin requirements in the patents regime.
Read about the 2024 NASA interns
Read about the Queenstown Lakes Economic Transformation and Resilience Fund
Read about the Strategic Tourism Assets Protection Programme decisions and allocation
Read about the first phase of RBI improved connectivity:
Read about the project in the document below.
Read additional information
Read an overview of pay equity and the framework
Read an overview of the changes:
Read image transcript: New gateway test that businesses can use
Read information on current employer obligations:
Read more about Corporate and Digital Shared Services
Read more about Immigration New Zealand
Read more about Labour, Science and Enterprise
Read more about Regional Development & Commercial Services
Read more about Strategy and Assurance
Read more about Te Whakatairanga Service Delivery
Read more about eInvoicing
Read more about how Part 6A operates
Read more about our Building, Resources and Markets
Read more about patents on the IPONZ website
Read more about the 2021 consultation and submissions
Read more about the Building System Regulatory Strategy
Read more about the Forced Labour Protocol.
Read more about the Government's decisions and work to refocus the science, innovation and technology system:
Read more about the Human Resources Development Working Group
Read more about the Milford Opportunities project
Read more about the NZ-DLR joint research programme
Read more about the Oranga Tamariki Guidelines
Read more about the Science Board
Read more about the Science System Advisory Group on our website:
Read more about the Seismic Review Steering Group
Read more about the Southland Just Transition:
Read more about the amendments to the regulations resulting from the review
Read more about the consultation and submissions
Read more about the consultation on the recommendations of the 2017 review
Read more about the consultation on the recommendations of the 2018 review
Read more about the evaluation of the New Zealand Cycle Trails
Read more about the independent review
Read more about the new requirements on the
Read more about the proposed changes to the adventure activities regime
Read more about the review on the DIA website.
Read more about this research in the report, downloadable here:
Read more about your rights as a consumer on the Consumer Protection website
Read more in our Outcomes Framework
Read more information on the regulations
Read previous issues of the
Read the Act on the New Zealand Legislation website
Read the Cabinet paper and associated Minute:
Read the Cabinet paper that began the review:
Read the Cabinet papers, Cabinet minutes and BNPL Regulatory Impact Statement:
Read the Chorus TSO Deed variation:
Read the Deed for Services between the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment and Utilities Disputes Limited
Read the Employment Action Plan
Read the Employment Relations (Extending Part 6A Protections to Security Officers) Order 2021
Read the Fair Pay Agreements Regulations 2022
Read the Fair Pay Agreements Regulations 2023
Read the Forestry and wood processing spotlight report series
Read the HTML version of the RSI Workforce Survey of Organisations Report
Read the Health and Safety at Work (Adventure Activities) Amendment Regulations 2023:
Read the Land Access Regulatory Impact Statement (RIS)
Read the Minister's announcements:
Read the Minister's full media release
Read the NESTF 2016 Users' Guide
Read the National Statement of Science Investment
Read the Open Weather Data Procurement Terms of Reference
Read the Pay Equity Regulatory Impact Statement
Read the Residential Tenancies Act Amendments 2016: 2018 Monitoring Report
Read the Scheme Rules (Source: Utilities Disputes) [PDF 477KB]
Read the Summary of Submissions
Read the Supplementary Order Paper
Read the Vodafone non-discrimination consultation summary of the submissions [PDF 49KB]
Read the announcement about the Bill by the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety, August 2019
Read the application documents
Read the first Science System Advisory Group report
Read the full Holidays Act Taskforce final report
Read the full Terms of Reference
Read the hospitality workforce survey report for 2024
Read the independent research and other background documents relating to the review:
Read the industry Q&A for technical information on the RBI
Read the inquiry's full report
Read the latest news and announcements about managed isolation and quarantine.
Read the latest news, media releases and ministerial announcements related to science funding and science and innovation.
Read the survey findings from the RSI Workforce Survey of Organisations and Individuals.
Read the targeted review of the adventure activities regulatory regime report
Read the terms of reference for the Taskforce
Read the terms of reference for the advisory council:
Real Estate Agents Authority
Recategorise plug-in hybrid electric vehicles and battery electric vehicles as petrol-powered and non-petrol powered vehicles respectively.
Received the endorsement of an organisation that was invited to provide nominees (in New Zealand, this is automatically granted to you by the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment for the first 15 nominees)
Receives $1600 per week in insurance payments.
Receives $704 a week in insurance payments.
Receives $928 per week in insurance payments.
Recent full code set and descriptions
Recent improvements mean we can use it more precisely and safely than ever before and places like Australia, Japan, the EU and England have safely embraced gene technologies.
Recipients of MBIE science-led funding are required to submit an annual report on the outputs and outcomes of activities undertaken/produced during the preceding 12 months.
Recipients who take up this scholarship but do not complete their applicable tertiary qualification may be required to pay back the full value of the scholarship received.
Recognised Seasonal Employer (RSE) Scheme
Recognised Seasonal Employer (RSE) scheme research
Recognised Seasonal Employer Limited Visa: Visa details
Recognised Seasonal Employer policy review
Recognised Seasonal Employer policy review, Summary of Submissions [PDF 291KB]
Recognised Seasonal Employer scheme
Recognising safer riders with lower levies
Recommendation 6 was amended after the Cabinet Paper was submitted. The amended recommendation reads:
Recommendations from the Joint Working Group on Pay Equity Principles
Recommendations of the report
Reconvened Joint Working Group
Record of high-altitude licences issued by the New Zealand Government
Record of the work completed by the previous Government before the 2023 General Election
Records and retention of personal information
Recruiting to fill board vacancies
Redeveloped Uplift Policy Criteria - July 2023
Redwoods Treewalk Rotorua
Refer to the sections above to see which of the below guidance documents are relevant to your licence or permit of interest:
Reference information, either one of the following:
Reference to a specific commercial product, process or service, whether by trade or company name, trademark or otherwise, does not constitute an endorsement or recommendation by the New Zealand Government or the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment.
Refocusing New Zealand Trade and Enterprise
Refocusing our approach to Industry Policy
Refocusing our approach to Industry Policy: Minute of Decision
Refocusing the science, innovation and technology system
Reform the vocational education and training system to ensure it responds to the needs of learners, industries and communities. (MOE/TEC)
Reforming the building regulatory system and building and construction sector
Reforms and review process agreed in August 2023
Refresh of people trafficking pages on INZ website, including new information about visas available to trafficking victims, and brochures translated into 9 languages.
Refresh the New Zealand Curriculum and Te Marautanga o Aotearoa so they promote knowledge-rich, clearly defined pathways to further education or work, grounded in the science of learning. (MOE)
Refreshed Terms of Reference
Refreshing competition settings
Refusing OIAs and withholding information
Regarding the development of a global space traffic management system, it is understood that significant work on this has, and continues, to t ake place and there are a number of possibilities for where this might lead in future. The Review examines whether, or to what extent, New Zealand’s legislative settings are well -placed to respond to future developments in this area. LeoLabs LeoLabs sp oke to the theme of a global space traffic management system. Its thinking on this is that while a country could develop one, it is not convinced it is likely to get buy-in from all major countries with an interest in space. While this is one view, the Review team is aware that there is a lot of work happening in this area, and there are a range of possibilities for how it might evolve in future. As it cannot be discounted entirely in future, the Review considers whether the e xisting statutory settings provide New Zealand with the flexibility to engage with developments in this area in future, should they arise. The Review considers it to be premature to make pre -emptive adjustments to the statutory settings in relation to th is matter. While discussions are underway at an international level on this topic, it is too early to determine what will ultimately arise in this space and any changes to New Zealand’s regulatory settings would need to be coherent with international pract ice and norms that have not yet been established.
Regardless of the approach, ambitious visions and comprehensive programmes of activity are commendable; however, DM plans should be realistic and focus on achievable outcomes, with short, medium and long-term priorities and actions.
Regenerative tourism ensures that tourism gives back more to people and places than it takes.
Regenerative tourism ensures that tourism gives back more to people and places than it takes. Tourism must add more than only economic value, it must actively enrich our communities and help protect and restore our environment.
Regenerative tourism will ensure that visitors to New Zealand- Aotearoa have a positive impact on our communities and leave as storytellers who are able to share our unique culture and heritage with the world.
Regional Business Partner Network
Regional Development & Commercial Services
Regional Development & Commercial Services is headed by Deputy Secretary Robert Pigou.
Regional Economic Activity Tools
Regional Economic Activity Web Tool
Regional Economic Activity mobile app
Regional Economic Activity reports
Regional Economic Activity web tool
Regional Economic Development
Regional Events Promotion Fund
Regional Events Promotion Fund: Round 2 application form - April 2025
Regional Events Promotion Fund: Round 2 application form - April 2025 [DOCX 102KB]
Regional Infrastructure Fund.
Regional Mid-sized Tourism Facilities Grant Fund
Regional Migration Trends report
Regional Research Institutes Initiative
Regional Skills Leadership Groups
Regional Strategic Partnership Fund
Regional Tourism Boost Fund
Regional Tourism Boost Fund - Application Form - February 2025
Regional Tourism Boost Fund - Application Form - February 2025 [DOCX 93KB]
Regional Tourism Boost Fund recipients
Regional Tourism Estimates
Regional Tourism Indicators (RTIs)
Regional Tourism Organisation New Zealand
Regional Tourism Organisations
Regional Tourism Organisations (RTOs)
Regional Tourism Organisations grants
Regional Workforce Plan 2023
Regional Workforce Plan Reflections 2023
Regional Workforce Plan Refresh 2023
Regional Workforce Plans and Local insight reports
Regional and seasonal dispersal of international tourists report
Regional economic activity
Regional economic development
Regional economic resilience in New Zealand - Summary [PDF 402KB]
Regional economic resilience in New Zealand [PDF 2.1MB]
Regional fuel tax impact on importer margins
Regional gross domestic product (GDP) per capita
Regional migration trends reports
Regional participation in the labour market
Regional tourism organisations will receive a total of $3 million to attract more international visitors to regional New Zealand this year.
Register as a network operator
Register of high-altitude vehicles
Registered Engineering Associates
Registered office: 23 Eden Street, Oamaru, 9400
Registered office: 32 Botha Road, Penrose, Auckland
Registered office: 41 Havill Street, Palmerston North
Registered office: Building B, Unit 293, 72 Apollo Drive, North Shore, Auckland 0632
Registered office: Ground Floor, New Zealand Post House, 7 Waterloo Quay, Wellington 6011
Registered office: Level 2, 116 Harris Road, East Tamaki, Auckland
Registered office: Unit F, 55 Richard Pearce Drive, Auckland Airport, Manukau 2150
Registered offices: 122B Centaurus Road, Christchurch.
Registered offices: 30 Sir Woolf Fisher Drive, East Tamaki, Auckland
Registered operators have the right to access and amend their information.
Registered postal operators have certain rights that are not available to other organisations and individuals involved in the delivery business. By law, they can:
Registering as a postal operator
Registering with a nominating agency will not necessarily mean that your name is put forward for a board vacancy. Agencies only nominate candidates who they consider meet the specific requirements of the role.
Registration date: 1 April 1998
Registration date: 11 October 2013
Registration date: 15 February 2000
Registration date: 17 August 2005
Registration date: 2 August 2001
Registration date: 2 March 2009
Registration date: 24 September 2004
Registration date: 27 June 2011
Registration date: 28 May 2014
Registration date: 29 April 1998
Registration date: 3 July 2015
Registration date: 30 March 2005
Registration date: 31 January 2006
Registration date: 4 August 2014
Registration date: 7 June 2007
Registration date: 9 October 1998
Registration fee It is proposed that the fee for registration is $45.00. This is less than the current fee of $88.89 and reflect s the direct costs of registration. The CO and NZBN levies (which w ould be applied to and annual return registration fee s across entity registers ) will be applied to this service for a total charge of $72.00 . Restoration fee It is proposed that the fee for restoration is $ 225.00. This reflects the level of work undertaken to restore an incorporated society to the register as if it had never been removed. This fee is the same as for company restorations. This service will not attract any levies . 33 Annual return fee – NEW Under the 2022 Act, incorporated societies will be required to file an annual return for the first time . An annual return fee of $ 9.00 is proposed to recover the administrative costs of processing returns. Annual returns were not required to be filed under the 1908 Act, so there is no current fee for this service. Incorporated societies registered as ‘charities’ with Charities Services under the Charities Act 2005 do not need to file an annual return with the Companies Office and so will not be required to pay this fee. Charities file their annual return with Charities Services and therefore would pay any annual return fees to the Department of Internal Affairs according to the fees that they charge . In the same transaction as the annual return fee (which recovers the direct cost of that service) incorporated societies will be charged the $12.00 NZBN levy and the $15.00 CO levy , to recover shared system cost s, in line with the proposed annual return charges for other entity registers. The proposed total annual return charge is $ 36.00. Amalgamation fee – NEW Section 191 of the 2022 Act provides for two or more societies to amalgamate as one society. There was no equivalent provision under the 1908 Act. As this is a new function, we do not know how much time it will take , although we expect it to be simpler than amalgamating two companies for which $745 .00 is charged. We also do not expect there will be many applications to amalgamate, but if two or more societies do wish to do so, this should not be prohibitively expensive for them. Therefore, we propose to set the fee at the same level as the restoration fee for an incorporated society of $225 .00. Conversion fee – NEW Section 257 of the 2022 Act provides for conversion of a body corporate or other association that is formed or incorporated by or under an Act that is specified by the regulations into an incorporated society. There was no equivalent provision under the 1908 Act. It is anticipated that the workflow to convert certain entities into an incorporated societ y is similar to the registration of an incorporated society and therefore the fee is proposed to be set at the same level of $ 45.00. As this service forms a new incorporated society, a CO levy and NZBN levy is proposed to be charged in addition to the fee. Limited Partnerships The Limited Partnerships Act 2008 established a modern regulatory regime for limited partnerships that gives the business community in New Zealand the option of a flexible and internationally recognised business structure, similar to limited partnerships used in overseas jurisdictions. Ta ble 1 7 on the next page shows the proposed adjustments to the existing limited partnerships registration fee, and the proposed amount for two new levies applied to the annual return service . Questions for submitters on proposals for the Incorporated Societies register: 10 What effect would the proposed total charge have on your organisation? 11 Are there any adjustments to the proposed fees(s) that you think should be reconsidered? If yes, which fee(s) and why? 12 Do you think the reasons for proposed adjustments to the fee(s) are clear and understandable? If not, why not? 34 Table 1 7: Proposed fee for Limited Partnerships register services $ (excluding GST) Limited Partnerships register Unit Cost Proposed fee Proposed levies Proposed total charge Current charge (fee) Change in charge % change Registration (New Zealand and overseas) * 387.94 388.00 27.00 415.00 217.39 197.61 91% Annual return (New Zealand and overseas) * - - 27.00 27.00 - 27.00 - * CO Levy $15, NZBN Levy $12.00 Registration fee When the current fee was set in 2012 the number of limited partnerships that register was expected to be in the low hundreds. Over time the recognised benefits of registering as a limited partnership under th e Limited Partnerships Act 2008 have been recognised, with approximately 380 new registrations annually. This in turn has resulted in approximately 4, 600 annual returns now being filed. It is proposed that the cost of processing the annual returns is recovered through the registration fee as the Limited Partnerships Act 2008 does not currently allow a fee to be charged for an annual return service . Accordingly, the charge for regis tration is proposed to increase from $217.39 to $ 415.00. Annual return fee No annual return fee is proposed. However, limited partners hips will be charged the CO and NZBN levies when they file their annual return . The Limited Partnerships Act 2008 may be reviewed later to include the ability to charge an annual return fee . Fees to be revoked The Limited Partnerships Regulations 2008 currently prescribe s fees for services that are no longer delivered by the Companies Office or are delivered differently compared to when they were introduced. Table 1 8 below summarises the fee proposed to be revoked in the regulations. Table 1 8: Proposed Limited Partnerships register fee to be revoked Currently , regulation 11 of the Limited Partnerships Regulations 2008 refers to how fees and penalties may be paid. We propose that fees and penalties can no longer be paid by cheque, in line with financial service providers and government departments phasing out cheque payments in 2021.23
Registration is normally automatic unless the applicant, or any person involved in the management of the business, has been convicted of any of the following criminal offences in the last 10 years:
Registration is not always required
Registration of a postal identifier does not create a trademark or other proprietary right.
Registration of objects launched into orbit or outer space
Registrations for the COVID-19 Response Recognition Award have now closed. Thank you to all those who worked at MBIE Managed Isolation and Quarantine (MIQ), Immigration New Zealand (INZ) or with one of our MIQ partners for applying.
Regular payments: Regular payments, such as payments for overtime and productivity or incentive -based payments, a re included in calculations of O rdinary Weekly Pay. Although the Act does not define what constitutes a regular payment, payments th at an employee receives on a regular basis should be included (for example, any payments that are paid every (or most) weeks should be included). MBIE Holidays Act Guidance1 includes advice for employers to help them determine what payments should be consi dered regular (Section 8 of the Act).
Regular survey of migrants and their experiences of life in New Zealand and New Zealanders about their perceptions of migrants.
Regulating building professionals and practitioners
Regulating companies and other entities
Regulating products, production, and consumption for a circular economy in Aotearoa New Zealand
Regulating the price of unbundled fibre products
Regulating to ensure space activities are safe and secure
Regulation 13 prescribes that an ODMP must: a) specify any international standard or guidelines followed (if any); b) specify any independent person or body that has assessed the plan (if any), and the result of that assessment; c) specify the orbital debris mitigation measures taken or intended to be taken, which measures must be sufficient to ensure: i. the release of debris during the normal operations of the vehicle or payload is limited; ii. the potential for break- up of the vehicle or payload while in orbit is minimised; iii. the potential for the vehicle or payload to collide with debris other than debris released in the course of the activity to which the licence or permit relates is minimised; and iv. at the end of the activity to which the licence or permit relates, the vehicle or payload is disposed of in a way that minimises risks to, or in, Earth’s environment and in the space environment (including the risk of collisions). 1.4 Policy intent New Zealand has established a licenc e and permit process for launch v ehicles and payloads . The requirement to supply an ODMP as part of that process is consistent with international best practice and is intended to ensure that proliferation of debris by space objects is limited , thus reduc ing the risk of collisions in space and the potential for debris to cause damage in orbit and upon atmospheric re -entry . The application of this policy is intended to evolve to reflect the development of new technologies, changes in the satellite and broader space industry and the orbital debris environment. 1.5 Information to be taken into account when applying this policy Information to be taken into account in the application of this policy includes : + relevant sections of the Act and regulations + the applicant’s submitted orbital debris mitigation plan and, where applicable, the orbital debris mitigation plan for the host satellite (for New Zealand payloads that are hosted by another satellite for a launch taking place overseas, both the host and payload permit applicant must meet the orbital d ebris mitigation requirements in the Act and regulations ) + any applicable technical advice, reports or assessments provided by other space agencies , regulators or experts + any overseas licence, permit or other authorisation relevant to the proposed activities .
Regulation in the research, science and innovation system
Regulation in the tourism system
Regulation of financial advice
Regulation supporting economic development
Regulations also set out competency requirements for vehicle inspectors. Certification Authorities will need to be satisfied that a person meets competency requirements before they appoint them as vehicle inspector.
Regulations for fibre installation
Regulations under section 226 of the Telecommunications Act 2001
Regulations under the Exclusive Economic Zone and Continental Shelf (Environmental Effects) Act 2012
Regulatory Assurance and Performance
Regulatory Impact Statement
Regulatory Impact Statement (RIS): Outer Space and High Altitude
Regulatory Impact Statement - Reform of Gene Technology Regulation [PDF 1.8MB]
Regulatory Impact Statement 1: 100-day commitments in Employment Relations
Regulatory Impact Statement 2: Further 100-day commitments in Employment Relations
Regulatory Impact Statement addendum: Buy Now, Pay Later Regulations [PDF 430KB]
Regulatory Impact Statement and Stage 1 Cost Recovery Impact Statement: Designating the banking sect...
Regulatory Impact Statement on the changes proposed by the Accident Compensation (Interest on Instalment Plans) Amendment Bill 2024.
Regulatory Impact Statement | 1 Regulatory Impact Statement: Holidays Act reform - Further Policy Decisions Purpose of Document Decision sought: Further improvements to the replacement of the Holidays Act 2003 Advising agencies : Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment Proposing Minister s: Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety Date finalised : 10 May 2024 Problem Definition Work has been underway to draft new legislation to replace the Holidays Act 2003 (the Act). However, detailed policy design work based on the 2020 Cabinet decisions to accept the Holidays Act Taskforce’s 22 recommendations revealed workability issues and t he extent of system changes for businesses and payroll providers that the implementation of those decisions would require. The Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety is planning to release an exposure draft in September 2024 to test the policy and tec hnical details before a Bill is introduced. Before an exposure draft is released there is an opportunity to make changes and additions to some existing policy decisions , to address issues identified through stakeholder feedback to date and allow for more effective feedback on unknown issues . These changes focus on areas where policy and drafting work can be undertaken quickly and would simplify, address gaps, and reduce implementation requirements for payroll and businesses. Executive Summary Issues with the Holidays Act 2003 have been a longstanding concern for employers, employees and payroll providers. The lack of clarity around the processes and calculations required to determine leave entitlements and payments, and reliance on employer judgement , have caused widespread and often unintentional non -compliance with the Act, resulting in high remediation costs for both public and private sectors. In 2018 the Government established the Holidays Act Taskforce (the Taskforce) to explore issues wit h the Act and in 2020 endorsed its 22 recommendations for improving it. The 2020 Cabinet decisions were intended to provide certainty and clarity for employers by providing greater prescription. The prescriptive formulas , methodologies and detailed processes agreed by Cabinet in 2020 add an inevitable amount of complexity. The Regulatory Impact Statement ( RIS) accompanying the 2020 Cabinet paper concluded that the 2020 proposals were superior to the Holidays Act 2003 on al l criteria except simplicity. Greater simplicity would have required a trade -off with other objectives , including ensuring that no employee would be worse off than under the current Act. Subsequent policy design and drafting work revealed the extent of co mplexity , and the implementation and compliance costs some of the processes and calculations agreed in 2020 would result in. The feedback from stakeholders involved in MBIE’s 2021 -2022 policy design process was that the size of these potential costs was so high that it cut back the net benefits of the changes. Some technical refinements were made through that policy design process that are consistent with the 2020 policy decisions, but th ere was not scope 6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:12:39
Regulatory Impact Statement | 10 It is intended that the co nsultation document that accompanies the exposure draft will seek feedback on options that are beyond the current scope for policy changes, and the Government may consider these options following consultation. What options are being considered? The follow ing options are being considered regarding the content of the exposure draft that is intended to be released in September 2024: • Option One: Exposure draft reflects the 2020 Cabinet decision to endorse the Taskforce’s recommendations, along with the technical refinements agreed by the previous Minister for WRS. • Option Two: Exposure draft largely reflects the 2020 decisions ( e.g. Option One) but incorporates changes and additions in order to simplify and reduce costs in areas where officials can comple te the necessary policy and drafting work before September. Under Option Two, we propose changes to three areas of the draft Bill, where there are known opportunities to reduce costs, simplify and improve workability within the constraints of the Septembe r exposure draft. 1. Earning, taking and paying annual leave: The changes focus on simplifying the way that employees earn and take annual leave (AL). A key change is moving to a weeks -based accrual system to simplify the end -to-end system for providing and paying AL entitlement and better support common practice. Other changes focus on reducing the extent of system changes required by the new methodology for determining the use of AL entitlement and ensuring the framework for paying AL with regular pay does provide the certainty that is missing from the Act. 2. Paying and accumulating other types of leave: The changes focus on reducing the complexity of the payment methodologies by removing the requirement to make two calculations and avoiding the overinfl ation of payments th is could have caused in some situations. They also update the profile for accumulating sick leave from the first day of employment. 3. Treatment of leave entitlements in a restructuring situation : This includes an adjustment to the policy regarding the treatme nt of leave entitlements in restructuring situations to provide flexibility and support common practice. Description and analysis of Option Two The following tables provide a description of the three areas for proposed change, accompanied by a qualitative analysis against the criteria listed above. For the purpose of this analysis, Option One, which is analysed in detail in the 2020 RIS, is considered the ‘status quo’ or ‘do nothing’ option. The tables also provide a brief description of the relevant provis ions in the current Act, without the 2020 changes. Key: + + Much better than doing nothing/the status quo + Better than doing nothing/the status quo 0 About the same as doing nothing/the status quo - Worse than doing nothing/the status quo - - Much worse than doing nothing/the status quo 6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:12:39
Regulatory Impact Statement | 11
Regulatory Impact Statement | 12 2. Paying and accumulating other types of leave (family violence, bereavement and sick leave (FBS leave )) Description Analysis of Option Two (compared to Option One) Payments for other leave types Current Act: • Payments are based on an employee’s relevant daily pay (RDP) or, if it is not possible to determine RDP or daily pay varies in the pay period, an employer may use ADP. Option One: • All employees would be paid at the greater rate of Ordinary Leave Pay (OLP) and a new hours - based Average Daily Pay (ADP) . Option Two: • There would be a consolidated single calculation comprising a base rate for wages or salary plus fixed allowances plus an average of productivity or incentive payments received plus the cash value of board and lodgings. Accumulating sick leave Current Act: • Eligible employees become entitled to the full sick leave allowance of 10 days after six months of continuous employment. Option One: • Proposes that eligible employees receive a portion of their sick leave entitlement on their first day of employment, with the remaining entitlement accumulating over a four-month period. In 2020, statutory sick leave entitlement was only five days per year, the four-month accumulation period reflects this smaller allowance. Option Two: • Proposes a longer accumulation period of six-months for sick leave entitlement to reflect the increase from five to 10 days sick leave per year. Clear and simple + + Paying FBS leave • One payment methodology is simpler than two and avoids additional complexity and administrative burden in situations where th e current calculation in the Act is straightforward. The intent is that, in situations where the current methodolo gy is straightforward, there would be little change from how payments are currently calculated. Accumulating sick leave • Fewer accumulation points for sick leave will be simpler and offer clarity around entitlement for employees and employers. Readily implementable + + Paying FBS leave • Systems only need to be capable of performing one calculation with no requirement for a comparison. A clear formula will make it possible to calculate variable components of pay in all cases. Accumulating sick leave • Fewer accumulation points will be easier to administer in leave management systems. Flexible and future proof ++ Paying FBS leave • The payment methodology is intended to be applicable to all work and pay patterns. Accumulating sick leave • The revised sick leave accumulation period is fit for purpose with the increase to ten days sick leave entitlement. Fair for employers and employees + Paying FBS leave • There is no solution that will produce a payment outcome that reflects precisely what an employee would have earned on a spec ific day in all situations, but the consolidated calculation is designed so that it should, overall, provide a fair outcome for both employers and employees (reflecting what they would have expected to be paid had they worked). It avoids the payment overinflation that the new hours -based A DP calculation would result in under option one in some ca ses but still incorporates the variable components of leave pay that are part of leave payments under the Act. Accumulating sick leave • The longer sick leave accumulation period reduces the impact on employers compared to the four -month period recommended but is aligned with the current entitlement timeframe of six months and still provides earlier access to sick leave equivalent to the 2020 decisi on (employees would still have access to five days after four months). 3. Treatment of leave entitlements in a restructuring situation Description Analysis of Option Two (compared to Opti on One) Current Act: • There is lack of legislative clarity regarding the treatment of leave entitlements for some employees in restructuring situations which results in common practice in breach of the Act (which requires AL to paid out and reset). Option One: • If an employee (not covered by Schedule 1A of the Employment Relations Act), is offered the choice to transfer employment, they will als o be given the right to choose whether to transfer their leave entitlements or have them paid out in accordance with the Holidays Act when employment with the outgoing employer ends. Option Two: • Proposes no change to the treatment of employees specified i n Schedule 1A of the Employment Relations Act. They must be offered choice to transfer employment and if they choose to do so must be given the choice to transfer leave entitlements. • For employees not covered by Schedule 1A of the Employment Relations Act , the matters that Employment Protection Provisions (EEPs) (a compulsory part of an employment agreement) must state employers will negotiate (if transfer of employment is negotiated) would be expanded to include matters related to the treatment of leave e ntitlements. This would include whether or not the new employer will recognise leave entitlement s and if so whether the employee will be provided a choice to transfer their entitlement s. Clear and simple + • Option Two avoids the need to mimic the complex legislative provisions that currently apply in transfer situations for specif ied employees (Sub -part 1 of Part 6A of the ERA) and set out a multi -step choice set for employees and employers and information di sclosure provisions. • Option Two does increase the complexity of the requirements for EEPs in employment agreements but is intended to support common practice around the negotiation of the treatment of leave entitlements. Readily implementable + • Implementation detail would be negotiated between the two employers so they can negotiate an arrangement that is workable for their systems. • Option Two will require a change to the employment agreement of all employees to amend the EPP. Flexible and future proof ++ • Option Two provides the flexibility for employers to adopt a range of approaches that best suit their specific business circumstances. I t is intended to support common practice. It would also require but maintain flexibility around the commercial negotiation of appo rtionment of liability and transfer of employee information. • In contrast, option one would require an incoming employer to offer transferring employees a choice to have their leave entitlements transferred or paid out by the outgoing employer as a downst ream decision of voluntarily agreeing for employees to be offered the choice to transfer employment on the same terms and conditions. Fair for employers and employees + • Option Two would not impose a statutory constraint on the contractual arrangements employers negotiate in restructuring situa tions. Such a constraint could discourage the incoming employer from offering employees the opportunity to transfer their employmen t if large leave liabilities were involved. • The proposal includes a safeguard for situations where an employee transfers employment on a lower rate of pay so the value o f transferred leave entitlements is not affected . • Employees may or may not have entitl ement transferred and may or may not have the option (unlike Option One where they would always have the option if they are offered and choose to transfer employment). 6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:12:39
Regulatory Impact Statement | 13 Which option is likely to best address the problem, meet the policy objectives, and deliver the highest net benefits? There are multiple, sometimes conflicting, objectives when developing a legislative regime for employee leave and pay entitlements. Policy makers are trying to balance appropriate minimum standards for employees with compliance costs for employers. A balance is needed to develop a framework that can be applied to all types of employment and work situations in a fair and consistent manner, whilst being easy to understand and implement , minimising the need for employer judgement. The current proposal (Option One) , based on the 2020 Cabinet decisions, gives effect to the high-level recommendations from the Holidays Act Taskforce. Detailed design work to take those recommendations and turn them into an implementable framework, made clear the complexity needed to achieve some of the desired outcomes. The methodologies for determining leave entitlements agreed by Cabinet in 2020 would necessitate significant changes to every payroll system used by New Zealand employers, including Government payroll systems4. The new proposals (Option Two) are the result of policy work inten ded to achieve the same high-level outcomes specified by the Taskforce, but with simpler payment methodologies and fewer calculation steps for employers and payroll providers to navigate. A simpler Act would be easier for employers and payroll to implement , minimise the need for extensive payroll changes and associated implementation costs and reduce on -going calculation costs. Employees would also benefit from a simpler Act with better clarity and transparency around their legal pay and leave entitlements. Although we cannot quantify the implementation costs, we believe they will be lower for Option Two and the consultation will provide an opportunity to test with stakeholders. Option Two proposals are expected to reduce the compliance burden for employers and improve overall understanding and workability of entitlements and obligations relating to leave for employees. The proposals under Option Two address feedback from stakeholders in some areas and are mainly focused on parts of the Bill considered to be critical to the overall operation of the legislation. The Option Two proposals prioritise areas where changes will improve the quality and usefulness of consultation feedback, while balancing progress towards delivery of a Bill for introduction. We antici pate these changes will improve the anticipated quality of submissions on the exposure draft of the Bill and go some way towards addressing the concerns that might have been raised by submitters otherwise.
Regulatory Impact Statement | 2 to address any of the issues with the underlying pol icy decisions MBIE and stakeholders identified through the detailed policy design process. Before the 2023 General Election, drafting of the Employment (Leave Entitlements) Bill (the Bill) began but was not completed. The Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety (WRS) intends to release an exposure draft of the Bill in September 2024 for targeted consultation. The purpose of the exposure draft is to identify remaining technical and workability issues with the proposed policy decisions and to understand stakeholder concerns and views before a Bill is introduced. There are two options related to the content of the exposure draft that is intended to be released in September 2024: • Option One: Exposure draft reflects the 2020 policy decisions (with technic al refinements) in their entirety. • Option Two: Exposure draft incorporates changes and additions (that were previously out of scope) to some of the 2020 policy decisions in areas where officials can complete policy and drafting work within the time availa ble before September. The Minister for WRS is proposing Option Two. The p roposed policy changes are intended to simplify the regime while maintaining broad alignment with the underlying framework of the Act and the objective of protecting the overall level of worker entitlements. Addressing some of the known issues will enable stakeholders to focus their feedback in other areas. The changes proposed under Option Two address some, but not all, of the issues with the 2020 policy decisions that MBIE and stakeholders have identified. Changes beyond this scope would involve substantial additional policy work and would not be achievable before September. The Minister for WRS intends to use the consultation document that will accompany the exposure draft to ask targeted questions about alternative policy solutions in these areas. This RIS acts as an addendum to the 2020 RIS1 and includes an additional qualitative assessment of the expected costs and benefits of the proposed policy changes in Option Two. The proposed policy changes will n ot significantly impact on the cost estimates in the 2020 RIS , which focus on the costs employers will incur because of the new payment methodologies and earlier access to some leave entitlements which are not changing. These proposals aim to reduce the co mpliance costs to employers of implementing the changes, which the 2020 RIS did not include analysis of. Following consultation in September 2024, the Minister for WRS may propose further policy changes before the Bill is introduced. Any new or substantial ly changed policy proposals will be subject to further regulatory impact analysis.
Regulatory Impact Statement | 3 Limitations and Constraints on Analysis There were a number of limitations and constraints relating to the 2020 RIS, although most of these were focussed on the costs and benefits of increases to leave payments and earlier access to leave entitlements. The 2020 RIS also identified some limitations and constraints rel evant to calculating implementation costs , which are the focus of the current proposals: • There had not been wide consultation on the Taskforce’s recommendations. The lack of comprehensive consultation constrained MBIE’s ability to fully understand the impa cts and costs of the Taskforce’s recommendations. • It was not clear what changes might be needed to implement recommendations in payroll systems and as a result, what potential costs might be for payroll providers and employers. • Accurately quantifying the cost of implementing system changes is inherently difficult. Costs will vary depending on a range of factors, including: o the size of the business/organisation o the nature of the employer’s workforce o the type and functionality of existing payroll systems us ed to manage pay and leave (including whether it is digital and, if so, whether it is cloud or non-cloud based , whether it is an ‘off the shelf’ or bespoke product that requires a customised implementation process and whether it is integrated with time and attendance systems) o the employer’s access to payroll expertise. • The Taskforce was given scope to change fundamental aspects of the Act so long as tripartite consensus between government, business, and union representatives could be maintained. This requi rement constrained the Taskforce’s recommendations. Additional limitations and constraints in this RIS include: • The refinements proposed in Option Two largely reflect MBIE ’s engagement with payroll providers during the 2021 -2022 policy design process and their feedback on areas where significant system changes would be required. A lack of b roader consultation remains a limitation on the analysis. It is, therefore, difficult t o quantify the extent to which Option Two might reduce implementation and compliance costs , which is why we have focused on qualitative analysis. • The proposal s in Option Two were constrained by the time available for policy development and drafting ahead of an exposure draft in September 2024. Policy refinement has occurred at pace with a focus on addressing some known gaps with the assumption that further insights and evidence will be provided during the exposure draft process. • The scope for making chang es to the existing policy decisions is limited to options that maintain broad alignment with the current drafting of the Bill and the underlying framework, which at the time required tripartite consensus. • Significant changes that would extend the timeframe for policy development and legislative drafting before an exposure draft could be released are out of scope and have therefore not been considered or analysed. The consultation document that accompanies the exposure draft will seek feedback on options tha t are beyond the current scope for policy changes, and the Government may consider these options following consultation. • The narrative description of proposed changes set out in this addendum is largely based on anecdotal feedback from stakeholders engaged with the detailed design process undertaken to date. The consultation process will ask targeted questions to 6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:12:39
Regulatory Impact Statement | 4 elicit more details about the implementation requirements, costs and impacts of proposed changes. While the limitations and constraints impact th e ability to quantify the costs and benefits of the options, MBIE consider s that the qualitative assessment based on feedback from stakeholders on the impacts of the 2020 policy decisions is sufficient to give Minister s confidence to make an informed decision on options for changes to be included in the proposed exposure draft fo r consultation. Responsible Manager(s) (completed by relevant manager) Alison Marris Manager, Employment Standards Policy Ministry of Business, Innovation, and Employment
Regulatory Impact Statement | 5 Section 1: Diagnos ing the polic y problem What is the context behind the policy prob lem? Issues with the Holidays Act 2003 have been a longstanding concern for employers, employees and payroll providers. The lack of clarity around the processes and calculations required to determine leave entitlements and payments make the Act difficult to app ly in practice, particularly when it comes to complex and evolving working arrangements that differ from a standard five -day, 40 -hour salaried week. The effect of the lack of certainty and clarity the Act provides to employers is that: • many employees are not receiving their correct entitlements, or payment for their entitlements • employers and employees do not have certainty regarding the provision of , and payment for , entitlements • employers, particularly those with large numbers of employees on variable wo rk and pay arrangements, can incur relatively high costs to comply with the Act • the Act cannot be readily systematised in a payroll system • many employers are carrying a liability that cannot be readily quantified (and may change significantly when employees change their work patterns). Reliance on employer judgement and poor implementation in payroll systems has caused widespread and often unintentional non -compliance with the Act, resulting in significant remediation costs for public and private se ctor employers. Until a legislative solution is provided, risk of ongoing non -compliance will remain. In 2018 , Cabinet agreed to establish a tripartite Holidays Act Taskforce (the Taskforce), comprised of government, business and union representatives , to recommend improvements to the Act . In 2020, Cabinet agreed to a legislative solution, endorsing the Taskforce ’s recommendations for improving the Act . The recommendations retain the underlying framework of the Act , which provides entitlement after specif ied periods of employment to weeks of annual leave and days of other types of leave , and include: • prescriptive methodologies, calculations and definitions intended to provide more certainty about how to calculate entitlements and pay • improved access to som e leave entitlements • some increases to minimum leave payments • improved transparency and clarity around some processes. The Taskforce focussed more on some of the objectives Cabinet set for it than others. It focussed particularly on providing greater certainty about how to calculate entitlements and ensuring that no employee would be worse off than under the current Act in an y circumstances. This focus required a significant trade -off with the objective of simplifying the Act. Between 2021 and 2022, MBIE brought together a small working group of payroll providers and practitioners to complete the detailed policy design proce ss required to implement the 2020 policy decisions in legislation. This work and initial d rafting of the Bill revealed ambiguities and gaps in the policy decisions, and the extent of complexity within the prescriptive methodologies and system changes they would require , particularly those used 6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:12:39
Regulatory Impact Statement | 6 by small businesses . For example, the recommended methodology for determining the hours an employee would have worked on a day of leave would require employers to have pay systems that are integrated with time and att endance, which many small businesses do not currently have . The then Minister for WRS made decisions on some refinements in response to technical issues identified by MBIE’s stakeholder working group, maintaining alignment with the 2020 policy decisions a nd tripartite consensus2. Drafting of the Bill was not completed before the 2023 General Election and further work to draft provisions that accurately reflect policy will be required to complete the Bill, irrespective of whether th ere are any further poli cy changes . What is the policy problem or opportunity? The Minister for WRS intends to release an exposure draft of the Bill in September 2024 for targeted consultation. The Minister has decided to test the workability of changes in the Bill with stakeholders to ensure any legislative changes are robust and en during. Stakeholders will be asked to comment on the technical details in the Bill and highlight any concerns around workability and implementation. Before an exposure draft is released, there is an opportunity to make some changes and additions to the existing policy decisions. A number of issues identified during the policy design process could not be addressed within the scope MBIE was given prior to the 2023 General Election. The scope required continued tripartite consensus and alignment with the unde rlying policy decisions which meant only technical refinements were possible. There is now scope to make some further policy changes to address known issues. These changes would simplify, address gaps and reduce implementation requirements for payroll and businesses and focus on areas where policy and drafting work can be undertaken quickly before September (they do not address all the known issues). Changes p roposed seek to resolve issues in the following areas: • The annual leave framework including access to annual leave entitlements, methodologies for determining how leave is taken, and Pay-as-You-Go leave payments. • Payment methodologies for family violence, bereavement and sick leave, and the accumulation period for sick leave entitlement. • Treatment of leave entitlements in restructuring situations. The proposed changes have been informed by consultation and drafting during the 2021 - 2022 policy design proce ss, which revealed that in some cases, the methodologies and processes would result in an inevitable amount of complexity . The proposed changes are achievable within the time frame and will improve the quality of feedback from stakeholders during consultation and reduce unnecessary feedback on known issues with already identified solutions. Depending on feedback received from stakeholders, more substantial changes may then be considered . Given the work that has happened to date and the risk of ongoing non - compliance, the most efficient way of seeking that feedback is to complete the legislative drafting , incorporating changes to some known issues with the 2020 decisions.
Regulatory Impact Statement | 7 Who will be affected by the prop osed changes ? The primary stakeholders are: • employers who struggle to comply with their obligations under the current Act • employees who do not always receive their correct entitlements • payroll providers who supply payroll systems to employers and payroll p ractitioners who work in employer organisations. All stakeholders stand to benefit from improvements to the Act. Businesses and payroll in particular will benefit from further refinements to the 2020 Cabinet decisions which aim to improve implementation a nd workability, whilst also reducing administrati ve burdens and compliance costs. Feedback provided by payroll providers and practitioners during MBIE’s 2021 -2022 policy design process has helped to inform the propos ed policy changes in Option Two . MBIE ha s also continued to engage with nominated representatives of Business New Zealand and the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions to seek their perspectives. They have indicated that they are supportive of work to simplify the changes. Employee representatives are likely to continue to oppose a fundamentally different basis for providing leave entitlements, such as an hours -based accrual model that many employers and payroll providers have suggested could provide a simpler model. Their opposition is driven by the p otential impacts on the principles of the current Act3 and, therefore, the current level of worker entitlements the Act provides. Compared to the 2020 Cabinet decisions, changes proposed in Option Two are not expected to have a material impact on specific population groups. The proposals will not substantially impact any of the proposed improvements in access to leave entitlements the 2020 policy decisions deliver. Improved access to entitlements will benefit all employees but particularly those employees in jobs with variable working patterns, lower levels of pay and less generous conditions of employment. Women, Māori, Pacific people s, disabled people and young people are more likely than other groups to be employed in these jobs . A key objective of the proposed changes to the 2020 policy decisions is to improve the accessibility and understandability of the new legislation which will benefit these population groups by making it easier for them to understand their leave entitlements. What objectives are s ought in relation to the policy problem? The 2020 RIS outlined the key objectives for improving the Act, which are still relevant : • Provide clarity and certainty to employers and employees about the rules for providing minimum leave entitlements and payment s. • Make the provision of, and payment for, entitlements to holidays and leave simpler and more readily applicable to the range of complex working arrangements in the labour market . • Make obligations easier to systematise and implement in payroll systems. • Minimise compliance costs . • Protect the overall level of entitlements the Act provides for employees.
Regulatory Impact Statement | 8 The previous Government had a bottom line of maintaining tripartite consensus . Achieving this result ed in a focus on ensuring no employee would be any worse off than under the Act. Protecting worker entitlements while providing greater certainty and clarity required a direct trade -off with the objective of simplifying the Act. The Minister for WRS has instructed MBIE to seek more balanced policy solution s (Option Two), considering all objectives, particularly simplicity and workability to improve implementation and compliance costs. 6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:12:39
Regulatory Impact Statement | 9 Section 2: Deciding upon an option to address the policy problem What criteria will be used to compare options? In order to meet the above objectives, the options have been assessed against the following criteria: Clear and simple • Obligations in relation to the provision of, and payment for, leave entitlements are as simple as possible, while providing clarity and certainty fo r employers and employees so that employees receive their correct entitlements and employers can have confidence they have met their obligations. Readily implementable to minimise compliance costs • Workable and readily implementable in payroll systems (including those used by large and small businesses). This includes minimising the system changes required and the need for employers to apply judgement and discretion when determining entitlements and payments. • Minimises administrative burden, imp lementation requirements and compliance costs. • Aligned with common practice (where this is well intentioned and desirable ). Flexible and future proof • Applicable to the full range of complex working and remuneration arrangements in the labour market both n ow and in the future. • Supports flexibility where it is appropriate for employers and employees to adopt an approach that suits their circumstances. Fair for employers and employees • Results in a fair outcome for both employers and employees and achieves a n appropriate balance of interests between parties. This includes maintaining overall levels of entitlement for employees but ensuring an appropriate balance between protection of entitlement and compliance costs. • Minimises the risk of any perverse incenti ves on employers or employees to arrange work and leave to minimise obligations or maximise entitlements. Appropriately calibrates the balance of decision -making between employers and employees. What scope will options be considered within? The scope for making changes to the existing policy decisions is limited to options that maintain broad alignment with the current drafting of the Bill and the underlying framework of the Act. Policy development and drafting work for options considered must be able to b e undertaken quickly, within the timeframe for release of an exposure draft in September 2024. What options are out of scope? Significant changes that would extend the timeframe for policy development and legislative drafting before an exposure draft could be released are out of scope. These include some further opportunities for simplification within the current framework, such as the payment methodologies for annual leave, and alternative policy options that represent a fundamentally different model for providing and paying leave entitlements, such as an hours -based accrual system for annual leave. 6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:12:39
Regulatory Impact Statement: Applying the Credit Contracts and Consumer Finance Act in a proportiona...
Regulatory Impact Statement: Easter Sunday Shop Trading
Regulatory Impact Statement: Holidays Act reform - further policy decisions
Regulatory Impact Statement: Holidays Act reform - further policy decisions [PDF 435KB]
Regulatory Impact Statement: Increasing the minimum sick leave entitlement [PDF 196KB]
Regulatory Impact Statement: Introducing an income threshold for unjustified dismissal [PDF 501KB]
Regulatory Impact Statement: Outer Space and High-altitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulat...
Regulatory Impact Statement: Partial strikes [PDF 456KB]
Regulatory Impact Statement: Strengthening consideration and accountability for the employee's behaviour in personal grievance process [PDF 577KB]
Regulatory Systems (Building and Housing) Amendment Act 2017
Regulatory Systems (Commercial Matters) Amendment Act 2017
Regulatory Systems (Economic Development) Amendment (No 2) Bill: Approval to table a Supplementary Order Paper
Regulatory Systems (Economic Development) Amendment (No 2) Bill: Supplementary Order Paper: Minute of Decision
Regulatory Systems (Economic Development) Amendment Act 2019
Regulatory Systems (Economic Development) Amendment Bill and Regulatory Systems (Immigration and Workforce) Amendment Bill: Approval for Introduction
Regulatory Systems (Economic Development) Amendment Bill, the Regulatory Systems (Housing) Amendment Bill, and the Regulatory Systems (Workforce) Amendment Bill: approval for introduction and new amendment to Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act 1987
Regulatory Systems (Housing) Amendment Act 2019
Regulatory Systems (Workforce) Amendment Act 2019
Regulatory Systems (Workplace Relations) Amendment Act 2017
Regulatory Systems Amendment Bill (2): new policy proposals
Regulatory Systems Amendment Bill (No 1)
Regulatory Systems Amendment Bill (No 2)
Regulatory Systems Amendment Bill (No 3)
Regulatory Systems Amendment Bill (No 3): Policy proposals
Regulatory Systems Amendment Bill (No 4)
Regulatory Systems Amendment Bills (RSABs) are a legislative vehicle used by MBIE and other large regulatory agencies.
Regulatory Systems Amendment Bills: policy proposals
Regulatory Systems Amendment Bills: policy proposals - Minute of Decision
Regulatory Systems Bill: Housing Portfolio Matters: cabinet paper
Regulatory Systems Policy Assurance and Performance
Regulatory cooperation is important because we live in an interconnected world. It can:
Regulatory impact statement
Regulatory impact statement for the accident compensation amendments to be included in the Regulatory Systems Amendment Bill (2)
Regulatory impact statement: Research and development Tax Incentive [PDF 161KB]
Regulatory impact statement: The Outer Space and High-altitude Activities Act 2017 Regulations [PDF 414KB]
Regulatory institutions and practices
Regulatory oversight, space related policy-making and sector development functions
Regulatory system assessment: Consumer and commercial system owner response [PDF 328KB]
Regulatory system assessments provide an insight into how well a regulatory system is working at a particular point in time within the existing policy and institutional framework.
Regulatory system governance
Regulatory systems amendment bills
Regulatory systems and stewardship
Reimbursement can be sought for refunds, credits and rebookings processed from 14 August 2020, which are made in respect of bookings confirmed on or before 14 August 2020.
Release of immigration information
Release of ticket reselling discussion paper
Released: Tuesday, 21 May 2024
Relevant D aily Pay (‘RDP’): What an employee would have received if they were at work on that day. Relevant D aily Pay includes: payments such as regular (taxable) allowances, productivity or incentive -based payments ( including commission and bonuses) , and overtime payments if the employee would have received them on the relevant day; and the cash value of board or lodgings if this has been provided by the employer. It does not include employer contribution payments int o an employee superannuation fund or reimbursements payable to the worker for the day (Sections 9, 9A, 10, 10A, 11, 49, 50, 52, 53, 60 and 71 of the Act ).
Relevant legislation, regulations and standards
Relevant legislation, regulations, and standards
Relevant sections Launch licence • 10(2)&(3) - Conditions, indemnity , and insurance relating to launch licence • 12(2) - Renewal of launch licence • 13 - Continuing obligations of licensee Payload permit • 18(2)&(3) - Conditions, indemnity and insurance relating to payload permit • 20 - Continuing obligations of permit holder Overseas launch licence • 26(2)&(3) - Conditions, indemnity and insurance relating to overseas launch licence • 28(2) - Renewal of overseas launch licence • 29 - Continuing obligations of licensee Overseas payload permit • 34(2)&(3) - Conditions, indemnity and insurance relating to overseas payload permit • 36 - Continuing obligations of permit holder Facility licence * • 41(2) - Conditions and indemnity relating to facility licence • 43 - Renewal of facility licence High -altitude licence* • 48(2) - Conditions and insurance relating to high -altitude licence If there is a proposed transfer or change of control of a licence or permit, the liability, indemni ty and insurance requirements are reviewed and conditions may be imposed as appropriate in accordance with this policy
Remediation deadlines for earthquake-prone buildings that had not lapsed as at 2 April 2024 have been extended for 4 years, to allow time for the Review and any subsequent changes to take place.
Remote Users Scheme (RUS)
Remove the No Claims Discount and cross-subsidisation of the Experience Rating framework.
Removing manual handling of your invoices means invoice information gets to the right place, at the right time with less chance of errors happening along the way. This all helps to reduce delays in processing and payment of your invoices.
Removing rewards for poor employee behaviour
Renewable electricity generation
Renewable energy strategy work programme
Rental Vehicle Association
Repairability is a measure of the extent and ease with which a product can be repaired and maintained.
Repealed 3 Waters economic regulation and consumer protection regime
Replace the current reference to OWP in the PLEPA with a standalone formula that is aligned with the methodology IR use s for the calculated income estimate of OWP in the online paid parental leave (PPL) application system. It would : • use a four -week average of an applicant’s gross weekly earnings ; and • specify the four -week reference period is the most recent four weeks up to the point that entitlement to parental leave payments commence s. Analysis • Practicality: Reduces compliance costs and administrative burdens for applicants an d their employers as m ost applicants or their employers would no longer need to run manual calculations to check the pre -populated figure . • Payment outcomes: The majority of applicants will be unaffected as their OWP and/or Average Weekly Income ( AWI) are a bove the maximum parental leave payment rate (89 percent in the 2022/2023 financial year, 32,587 of 36,544 applicants). For those affected , the impact on payment will depend on their remuneration structure .15 I consider that, overall, the proposal will provide a fair outcome for applicants and aligns with the original intent of including OWP in the methodology by providing a significantly different reference period to the 52 -week period used for the AWI calcul ation . • Costs to government: It is not possible to calculate an exact fiscal cost due to the number of variables but as only a small percentage of applicants are affected, costs should be minimal. IR expects costs will
Replace the previously - agreed approach with
Report migrant exploitation form
Report of concern (ROC) data will be analysed for relevance and usefulness.
Report on UK and Norway R&D Tax Credit Schemes [PDF 180KB]
Report on analysis of consultation meetings [PDF 180KB]
Report on energy hardship measures
Report on the 2021 survey of Registered Engineering Associates: views on raising the annual registra...
Report on the findings of the Tourism New Zealand Domestic Demand Review
Report on the operation and effectiveness of the OSHAA
Reporting Migrant exploitation form
Reporting and disclosures based on the circular economy (and sustainability more broadly) are increasing, as consumers, governments, and businesses set higher expectations around the environmental impacts of production and consumption. In turn, this has also highlighted greenwashing issues.
Reporting any non-compliance with this policy to their people leader.
Reporting migrant exploitation
Reporting on prosecutions outcomes in accordance with the
Reporting on the Older Workers Employment Action Plan
Reporting on the Plan of Action is important to show ongoing commitment to these issues, to maintain focus in this area, to allow greater awareness in agencies of complementary work underway, and to provide stakeholder groups outside government the ability to understand, influence and support government activities. The Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety has agreed that annual implementation reports will be produced and published on the MBIE website.
Reporting possible wrongdoing by our staff
Reporting under the ILO constitution
Reporting, disclosures, and greenwashing prevention
Reports from the individual research projects:
Reports on the environmental impacts of tourism
Reports, data and analysis on the New Zealand screen sector:
Request an independent review
Request for OIA responses on the "Oranga (Wellbeing)" research project
Request for OIA responses on the "Oranga (Wellbeing)" research project [PDF 337KB]
Request for Proposals - Food Safety Science and Research Centre
Request for proposals released
Request for the costs associated with the "Oranga (Wellbeing)" research project
Request for the costs associated with the "Oranga (Wellbeing)" research project [PDF 329KB]
Requests should include your name, your postal address or preferred email address, and specific details of the information you want.
Requiring adventure activity operators to register directly with WorkSafe (rather than indirectly via their auditor) and some adjustments to the information they have to provide.
Research Reports on Domestic Tourism
Research and Development Tax Incentive
Research and Development Tax Incentive for Implementation [PDF 328KB]
Research and Development Tax Incentive: Review of implementation [PDF 238KB]
Research and development data
Research and development survey: 2020
Research and development tax incentive
Research by the Leather and Shoe Research Association (LASRA) has been awarded a Gold Status by the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment for exceeding excellence and impact.
Research commercialisation
Research drew on various data collection sources, including a literature review, an environmental scan, and in-depth interviews and focus groups with various stakeholders. These included financial capability providers, the Retirement Commission and participants in financial capability programmes.
Research helping New Zealand prepare for the new reality of extreme wildfires
Research on the impact and effectiveness of international modern slavery legislation completed.
Research summary and insights: circular economy and bioeconomy As part of the first Emissions Reduction Plan, the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (M BIE) undertook a programme of research to determine New Zealand’s potential to reduce emissions through resource efficiency and recovery ( circular economy) and h ow to get greater value from New Zealand’s biological resources (bioeconomy) . The research was focu sed on developing evidence and insights relevant to New Zealand’s distinctive economy, and related challenges and opportunities. For the purposes of th e research: a) a circular economy involves designing out waste and pollution, keeping resources in use for as long as possible, then recovering and regenerating products and materials at the end of their lifecycle b) the bioeconomy encompasses the sustainable use of natural biomass resource and a reduction in waste and pollutants coupled wi th transitioning awa y from dependence on fossil fuel resources. Both have objectives to achieve economic, environmental, cultural and social outcomes. Research was commissioned from a range of external providers over the period December 2022 to May 2024. Reports from the i ndividual research projects are available on MBIE ’s Circular Economy and Bioeconomy webpage . A range of quantitative and qualitative research methods were used in the projects including: • Material flow analysis: Analysis of mass, energy and carbon emissions data, including presentation in Sankey diagrams, which provide a visual representation of the flows of materials and emissions for New Zealand’s economy as a whole , and for waste, food, energy and built environment sectors. 2 • Market analysis: Analysis of emerging or potential bioeconomy opportunities from a commercial perspective, assessing growth r eadin ess across four dimensions: competitiveness of production for the required biomass; clarity of customers and markets; competitiveness of processing and logistics; and the level of organisation and cooperation in the industry. • System approaches: Use of system maps and tools, such as the multi -level perspective, to identify patterns of activity and change at sector and whole economy levels and best potential leverage points for actions. • Literature scan and stakeholder interviews : All projects undertook scans/reviews of relevant international and New Zealand published research. Conversations with s takeholder were used to elicit and test insights and findings during the research.
Research summary and insights: circular economy and bioeconomy [PDF 523KB]
Research to support and help future-proof the ageing workforce
Research will also meet the needs of industry, helping to grow exports and ensure local food and beverage businesses have access to foreign markets through meeting internationally recognised food safety standards.
Research, Science and Innovation
Research, Science and Innovation (RSI) Workforce Surveys
Research, Science and Innovation Domain Plan
Research, Science and Innovation System Performance Report
Research, Science and Innovation Workforce Survey of Individuals Report
Research, Science and Innovation Workforce Survey of Organisations Report
Research, Science and Innovation sector data
Research, evaluation and monitoring in relation to consumer credit including evaluation of the Credit Contract and Consumer Finance Act (CCCFA).
Research, science and innovation
Research, science and innovation briefings on the R&D tax incentive 14 June - 29 August 2018 [PDF 216KB]
Researchers held some ethnic specific focus groups to allow for exploring differences in perspectives and experiences across Pacific ethnic groups. This included talanoa (discussion) with participants who identified with the following ethnicities: Samoan, Tongan, Niuean, Cook Islander, Fijian and non-Pacific.
Reserve Bank of New Zealand
Residential Tenancy Agreement Builder
Residential insurance claims resulting from natural disasters
Resolution of illegal mining case sees reparation to local community
Resource Management Act 1991
Resource efficient buildings and infrastructure, for example switching to more renewable, bio-based, and recycled materials.
Respecting people for who they are.
Responding to the Royal Commission on the Pike River Coal Mine Tragedy
Response template: Review of New Zealand Companies Office Fees and Levies (2025)
Response times and charges
Response times will vary between teams across MBIE and the complexity of the complaint. If a response cannot be provided in a short turnaround, and requires further investigation, this could take up to approximately 20 days.
Response to Canterbury earthquakes
Response to in-hearing request for further information
Response to the rapid building assessment system review
Responses to Royal Commission recommendations
Responses to selected OIA requests received by us.
Responses to selected Official Information Act (OIA) requests of public interest
Responses to the Canterbury Earthquakes Royal Commission recommendations - final report
Responsibility for the Bioresource Processing Alliance, New Zealand Product Accelerator and New Zealand Food Innovation Network will transfer to the most relevant PRO.
Responsible camping reforms
Responsible for embedding the policy into operational activities within their business area
Responsive skills systems enabling learning for life
Restrict the planting of new trees on land that is not already forested outside of urban areas.
Restricted Office of the Minister for Economic Development and Science and Innovation Chair, Cabinet Economic Growth and Infrastructure Committee THE SCOPE OF SPACE POLICY AND A LEAD SPACE AGENCY Proposal 1 This paper proposes a broad scope for space policy including all of New Zealand’s interests in space: space launches, satellites, satellite applications and payloads performing similar applications carried to very high altitudes by balloons and potentially other aircraft . 2 The paper also proposes that there be a lead agency for space policy and to administer the proposed space legislation. The functions of the lead space policy agency could be located in the Ministry of Transport or the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE). The Minister of Transport and I have agreed that, due to the significant economic development and innovation objectives of the proposed Space Activities Act, and the need to maintain momentum in the policy, legislation and implementation work streams, MBIE should be the lead space policy agency for an initial period of three years. However, this decision will be reconsidered as part of the legislatively required review of the Space Act which will take place three years after enactment. The lead space policy agency will have a significant coordination role and a cross-agency coordination mechanism is proposed to formalise this. Executive summary 3 Rapid developments in space technology have enabled smaller, cheaper satellites and lower cost satellite launch services. This has made space accessible to more players - a process sometimes referred to as the democratisation of space. Rocket Lab’s innovative new rocket technology and streamlined business model put it at the forefront of these developments. 4 Rocket Lab’s proposal to commence commercial space launches from New Zealand has precipitated the need for us to develop legislation to enable space launches from our territory, to meet our obligations under international treaties as a launch state and manage the safety and security risks. The process of developing the legislation has highlighted that space is of immense strategic importance around the world and that international legal and policy frameworks are evolving in response to the fast pace of development in technology and business models. 5 It has become clear that we have to rapidly build our policy capabilities in the space realm to capitalise on the emerging economic opportunities, advance our interests in space, and manage international relationships and obligations. 6 New Zealand’s interests in space extend beyond space launches to satellites and their uses. Satellites enable the provision of critical services and infrastructure including banking, transportation, electricity, telecommunications, navigation, remote sensing (with applications ranging from agriculture and land-use monitoring to disaster management and climate change) and national security. Hence, this paper proposes that space policy 1 7yr8upqmdi 2016-03-31 09:42:41 Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act encompasses all of New Zealand’s interests in space including economic development, national security, foreign policy, safety and the environment. It also proposes that space policy includes the use of technologies operating at very high altitudes that carry out similar functions to satellites, so that New Zealand is well positioned to control these activities in the future as technological advances and circumstances require. 7 The breadth of space policy means that knowledge is located in different agencies. New Zealand has a few pockets of space policy expertise including the Radio Spectrum policy team at MBIE and satellite applications in the New Zealand Defence Force (NZDF), Land Information New Zealand (LINZ) and some Crown Research Institutes. However, no single agency is responsible for advancing New Zealand’s policy interests in relation to space and space applications. I propose to address this by assigning a lead agency for space policy. The agency will assume the substantive policy lead in areas where there are currently gaps (e.g. in the economic development dimensions of space policy, the regulatory dimensions of space policy and contributing to the development of international norms and rules associated with the use of space). The agency will also have a substantive coordination role and a cross-agency coordination mechanism is proposed to formalise this. 8 I do not consider that the scale of the proposed policy and regulatory functions justifies the establishment of a standalone agency. Instead the new functions can be located within an existing agency based on the strategic fit and alignment with the agency’s mandate and capabilities. The two most suitable candidates for the space policy functions are either the Ministry of Transport or MBIE. The choice between these agencies comes down to a judgement about the best strategic fit for space policy i.e. whether it is more closely aligned to growth and innovation outcomes or more closely aligned with transport safety including system resilience. In both Australia and the UK, the space policy lead agency is hosted by agencies with substantially similar responsibilities to those of MBIE in the science and innovation and economic development areas. 9 The regulatory functions associated with implementing the proposed regulatory regime for space launch activities could be located with the lead policy agency or with a separate entity. However, as the authorisation functions (including national security considerations, safety assessment and financial assurance) are closely associated with the policy functions, I propose to keep these two functions together. 10 Once the proposed legislation is enacted, licensing fees on industry participants will be used to recover the costs associated with the regulatory functions. An implementation work stream has been established to develop the approach to approving and monitoring Rocket Lab’s launches and payloads in 2016 and to develop detailed procedures for approving and monitoring rocket launches and payloads once the Act comes into force. 11 Until the legislation is enacted, I propose that the costs associated with implementing the regulatory regime be absorbed within agency baselines as the process involves a degree of capability building by agencies and there are public good reasons for meeting these costs from Crown funding. 12 The costs associated with developing space policy will be met from Crown funding as is usual for funding government policy advice. Should MBIE or the Ministry of Transport be the lead agency, they would address any budget pressures associated with taking on these functions as part of their four year plan in the 2017 Budget. 2 7yr8upqmdi 2016-03-31 09:42:41 s 9(2)(f)(iv) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Background Rocket Lab’s proposal to commence commercial space launches from New Zealand requires us to rapidly develop our policy and regulatory capability 13 Rocket Lab (a US company founded by New Zealander Peter Beck and with a New Zealand subsidiary) is offering regular commercial space launches from the Mahia Peninsula commencing in late 2016. Rocket Lab has developed innovative rocket technology that enables it to offer dedicated launches for small satellites (at around 10% of the price of other commercial services) and its streamlined launch service aims to reduce the time required to launch small satellites into space, making commercial launches more accessible. 1 New Zealand offers advantages as a space launch location for reasons including our remote geographic position and low levels of air traffic. 2 A regulatory regime will also need to have due regard for payloads which could have dual civilian and military/intelligence uses, or the launch of which would not be in New Zealand’s national security or foreign policy interests. 14 Commercial space launches provide economic opportunities for New Zealand, but are set against a background where security issues are highly relevant1. For example, before Rocket Lab can commence space launches, New Zealand must conclude a Technology Safeguards Agreement (TSA) with the US. The TSA will enable the transfer of sensitive US technologies for use in the launch vehicles, and imposes obligations on New Zealand regarding the secure use and management of those technologies. The establishment of a space launch industry in New Zealand also has the potential to create national security and foreign relations benefits. More widely, it will enable New Zealand to play a more active role in promoting the responsible use of space alongside likeminded nations at a time when changes in the international regulatory environment are needed in response to the rapidly evolving commercial sector. 15 The need for a domestic regulatory regime for space activities was precipitated by the need to ensure we meet our international obligations as a launch state (including United Nations space treaties as well as the TSA), and to manage safety and national security issues arising from frequent launches. In November 2015, Cabinet agreed to develop a 1 A report by Sapere on the potential economic benefits of the development of a commercial space launch industry in New Zealand estimates that Rocket Lab could contribute between $750 million to $1,550 million of value add to New Zealand over 20 years. This includes the downstream effects of New Zealand industries having easier access to satellite technologies . 3 7yr8upqmdi 2016-03-31 09:42:41 s 6(a) s 6(a) s 9(2)(b)(ii) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act new regulatory regime to enable commercial space launches from New Zealand (Cab- 15-Min 0274 refers). 16 The development of the legislation has highlighted the need for a more comprehensive and coordinated space policy capability to help government balance commercial, wider economic, national security, foreign policy and other interests. To address this, Cabinet directed that MBIE in consultation with key agencies to report back to Cabinet with further advice on space policy and space agencies by the end of March 2016 (Cab-15- Min 0274 refers). The scope of space policy Space policy encompasses all of our interests in space, including space launches, satellites and satellite applications and similar applications undertaken at lower altitudes by payloads carried by aircraft such as balloons 17 Space is of great importance to modern life and the costs of accessing space are falling rapidly. Advances in technology have enabled the development of very small satellites and lower-cost launches with the ability to carry multiple satellites into space. Larger fleets of smaller satellites are operating with greater capability and these developments are creating opportunities for a greater number of government and private customers to take advantage of satellite applications. 18 As a result, we are seeing a significant increase in the number of commercial satellites being launched and a continued reduction in the average satellite mass. A key driver of this is the growing popularity of nano/microsatellites (satellites less than 50kg) for civil and commercial use. In 2014, 158 nanosatellites were launched globally (an increase of around 72% compared to 2013). One market assessment predicted that the number of small satellites launched each year from 2014 to 2020 would continue to show steady growth reaching 410 to 543 satellites a year by 2020 (a total of 2,000 to 2,750 satellites over the period).2Rocket Lab is at the forefront of this business in providing dedicated launches for small satellites (rather than having them as secondary payloads on the launches of bigger satellites). 19 New Zealand has a well-established (but still developing) interest in satellites and their applications. Satellites typically carry out a few basic functions: remote sensing, communications, global navigation, broadcasting, national defence, manned spaceflight support and research. Some of these functions have a very wide and increasing range of applications. For example, remote sensing satellites are used for weather observation, land-use monitoring, resource management, climate change monitoring, military surveillance and mapping, amongst other things. Communications satellites provide internet access, television, telephone and other data relay services; some are configured as intelligence collectors. 20 The uses of navigation satellites for aircraft, shipping and road vehicle navigation and control systems and precise terrestrial location information are well known. Less familiar, but no less essential, is the use of the precision time-synchronisation systems these satellites incorporate to facilitate the accurate clock reference of computer networks used for commercial services such as banking and stock-exchange transactions, and 2 Spaceworks’ 2015 Small Satellite Market Observations; Spaceworks’ 2014 Nano/Microsatellite Market Assessment. Projections are based on announced launch intentions, market research and qualitative/quantitative assessments. 4 7yr8upqmdi 2016-03-31 09:42:41 Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act critical national infrastructure services such as electricity networks. Other functions may be developed in future. 21 Other systems, including balloons and certain types of aircraft operating at very high altitudes (from about 100 kilometres down to the normal operating altitudes of aircraft – also known as “near space”) may carry out similar functions to those of satellites in the future. Compared to satellites these have both advantages and disadvantages that make them more or less suitable for the various applications described above. The use of vehicles operating at these altitudes for these applications is still developing, and military and civil utilisation of this zone is increasing with the consequent need to address issues such as overflight of New Zealand territory, national security, and safety. To enable New Zealand to be well positioned to control future activities in this area, this paper proposes that the scope of space policy include certain activities at very high altitudes. When I report back to Cabinet on the proposed space activities Bill, I will recommend that very high altitude activities are included within the scope of the legislation. Space policy principles and guiding objectives 22 New Zealand is seeking to facilitate the development of a safe, secure, responsible and sustainable commercial space launch industry. The establishment of a space launch industry creates a strategic opportunity for New Zealand to build our capabilities and expertise in the space sector and to apply space technologies (e.g. advanced materials, navigation and guidance systems and rocket propulsion) to a range of other domestic industries. It also creates the potential for New Zealand to design, build and have satellites in space. 23 The fast pace of space technological development and the increased number of players is creating a challenging and evolving international environment. Other countries such as Australia and the UK are currently re-examining aspects of their legal and policy frameworks to ensure that their current provisions strike the right balance between encouraging innovation and industry development in the use of space, managing the risks and vulnerabilities created by a more congested and contested space environment and managing the associated government liabilities arising from international treaty obligations. 24 The approach that New Zealand is taking to space policy is informed by developments in likeminded countries which are grappling with similar issues. Officials have begun to establish relationships with international space experts and space policy and regulatory agencies in the UK, US and Australia. However, we cannot simply wait for international consensus to develop on all issues. New Zealand’s space policy will reflect our unique circumstances as an emerging space faring nation and as a niche player in the rocket launch industry. 25 The principles that are relevant to space policy were set out in the November Cabinet paper, A Regulatory Regime to Enable Space Launches from New Zealand (Cab-15-Min 0274 refers). These principles are:  Supporting New Zealand’s economic development interests, through providing a comprehensive but flexible policy and regulatory framework to achieve safe and secure launches while supporting industry development and innovation;  Supporting New Zealand’s national security interests and international security partnerships through reducing or removing the current security risks a New 5 7yr8upqmdi 2016-03-31 09:42:41 Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Zealand-based space launch industry poses, mitigating the risks to New Zealand’s security that result from other actors’ behaviour in space, strengthening security co-operation including with other space-capable states, and providing more opportunities to improve New Zealand’s and our partners’ defence force effectiveness;  Managing the Crown’s interests (including foreign policy and security interests), through support for the exercise of New Zealand sovereignty, managing the Crown’s exposure to liability risk, providing a robust compliance/oversight regime and fulfilling international treaty obligations; and  Consideration of a New Zealand position on broader space security issues, including norms of responsible behaviour in space, the possible weaponisation of space, self-defence in space, and the risks of debris in Earth orbit. 26 In support of these principles, the following policy objectives set out the key aims that New Zealand’s space policy shall seek to address:  Facilitate the development of a safe and responsible space industry including managing effects on Earth, in space and on other users;  Promote the use of satellite and very high altitude vehicle applications;  Ensure the equitable, efficient and sustainable access to satellite orbits and radio spectrum resources used for space services;  Preserve and advance New Zealand’s position in space and access to space capabilities;  Ensure New Zealand’s international rights and obligations in the use of space are met and that the Government’s liabilities as a launching state are managed adequately; and  Enhance and protect national security. 27 These objectives will be used to guide the development of New Zealand’s space policy. I propose that the lead agency for space policy report back to the responsible Minister with further advice on New Zealand’s space policy by October 2016. 28 We have limited understanding about the extent to which different New Zealand industries and sectors are using or planning to use satellites and space technologies or what the opportunities are to extend the use of these applications in New Zealand. Improving our knowledge of this will enable us to identify opportunities for economic growth and innovation, and identify where government can facilitate the uptake and use of these new technologies. I propose that information on the potential for satellite and very high altitude applications in New Zealand form part of the October space policy report back. Space agencies: functions and form A space policy agency needs a broad mandate and leadership role supported by an explicit coordination mechanism to integrate the multiple interests in space policy 6 7yr8upqmdi 2016-03-31 09:42:41 Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act 29 New Zealand has a few pockets of space policy expertise, e.g. the Radio Spectrum policy team at MBIE and satellite applications in the NZDF, LINZ and some Crown Research Institutes but no single agency is currently responsible for advancing New Zealand’s space objectives or for coordinating advice across all policy agencies with an interest in space. Given the broad scope of space policy, the required knowledge and expertise is unlikely to reside solely in one organisation. However, it is desirable that there be a lead agency to provide a central point of contact within government on space policy, to coordinate advice across multiple policy dimensions, and to assume the substantive policy lead where there are currently gaps (e.g. the economic development dimensions of space policy; the regulatory dimensions of space policy including development and maintenance of domestic space law; and contributing to the development of international norms and rules associated with the use of space). 30 Decisions on the lead agency should take into account the functions that need to be carried out as they relate to both space policy and implementation. Space policy functions 31 In order to lead effectively across the multiple policy dimensions associated with space, a lead policy agency would have the following functions:  Policy advice (including research, monitoring and evaluation, and strategic planning). It is proposed that the authorisation of space launches, payloads and satellites be located with the policy function. A key component of the authorisation function will be an ongoing risk assessment and advice on how the government can manage its liability associated with being a launching state in the context of a rapidly evolving commercial market, and the development of strategies to manage this liability and pass it on to the space launch and payload operators;  Developing and maintaining (jointly with MFAT) New Zealand’s international relationships and New Zealand’s international obligations for space3. (Defence will continue to manage military-to-military relationships); and  Domestic coordination of information and advice across the various policy dimensions. This is likely to be a significant part (e.g. up to 80%), of the policy advice function. 32 The lead agency would have objectives of building on our existing knowledge, integrating the diverse interests of government agencies, and leveraging international resources to achieve the capabilities we need. Consistent with this, I seek Cabinet approval for:  A space policy agency with a broad mandate and clear leadership role . While the lead space policy agency would have overarching responsibility for the totality of New Zealand’s interests, in practice we could contemplate one or two centres of excellence based around commercial applications of space on the one hand and defence/security applications on the other. There would need to be explicit and effective coordination between the two centres of excellence.  A domestic coordination committee . An explicit function of the lead agency for space policy will be the coordination of information and advice across domestic 3 A list of UN space treaties and international institutions is attached in Annex 1. 7 7yr8upqmdi 2016-03-31 09:42:41 Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act agencies. This could comprise a cross-agency senior officials group, e.g. for linkages to the New Zealand Intelligence Community. The host agency for space policy would provide a secretariat for the coordination committee. Further work will be needed to work out practical systems and structures to manage the production of advice, including from intelligence and security agencies. Functions within the scope of implementation 33 The draft legislation establishes the following regulatory functions: Authorisation of space launches, payloads and satellites; National security considerations; Registration of space objects; Monitoring and enforcement; Accident investigation; Designation of secure areas; Issuing of security cards; and Education, information and guidance for industry participants. 34 These functions could be conducted or co-ordinated through the space policy agency (i.e. MBIE or the Ministry of Transport). As the authorisation functions are closely associated with the policy grounds for assessing a license application, the proposal is to keep these functions with the policy function. The powers associated with these functions will be assigned through the legislation to the appropriate entity. For example, while the lead agency would be responsible for providing advice on the granting of a license to the responsible Minister, the power to issue, revoke or suspend the licence would reside with the Minister. 35 The agency charged with undertaking authorisations needs to gear up quickly and be highly responsive. In particular, the regulator needs quickly to develop the capability to understand the risks associated with licensing space launches and the operation of space objects, but the expertise required, (e.g. to undertake detailed technical and risk assessments), could be contracted in as needed. 36 The remaining functions listed in paragraph 35 above could be located within an existing regulatory entity but, in practice, the implementation of the new regulatory regime will involve a significant coordination element. For example: Accident investigations will be carried out by one or more of the following agencies: New Zealand Police, Work Safe, the Civil Aviation Authority, Maritime New Zealand or the Transport Accident Investigation Commission; The New Zealand Intelligence Community4 has the requisite expertise and mandate to evaluate matters relevant to national security. The New Zealand Intelligence Community will assist with risk-based security assessments (Protective Security Requirements) for companies participating in the space industry (whether conducting launch activities or developing space applications); and The Aviation Security Service has capabilities in issuing security cards. 4 The New Zealand Intelligence Community includes the NZSIS and GCSB as well as parts of DPMC, NZDF, MoD, MFAT and others as necessary. 8 7yr8upqmdi 2016-03-31 09:42:41 Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act 37 The question of which agency carries out the enforcement functions will be resolved through the development of an implementation process and will be addressed in subsequent reports to Cabinet. Candidate agencies for lead space agency 38 This paper seeks a decision on which agency should be responsible for administering the proposed space legislation. My assessment is that the nature and likely scale of activities associated with space policy (including administering the new legislation) do not justify the creation of a standalone agency. I propose that these functions be located with an existing agency based on the best fit with mandate and capability. 3 The two most likely lead agencies for space policy are the Ministry of Transport or MBIE. Officials have also considered the NZDF but concluded that the economic development objectives do not fit well with that agency’s mandate and focus on national security. However, the NZDF and Ministry of Defence will maintain and develop specialist expertise around space policy for national security and military applications. The New Zealand Intelligence Community will also maintain a role in assessing the implications of space policy and activity from a national security standpoint. 39 The primary regulatory functions associated with the authorisation of space launches, payloads and satellites could be carried out by MBIE or the Ministry of Transport. However, as noted above, in practice, there will be different regulatory agencies involved in different aspects of the regulation of space activities. 40 The State Services Commission has developed guidance on the preferred location for policy functions where the choice is between agencies of the same type. The guidance incorporates a set of criteria which are weighted according to their relative importance. The criteria that are most relevant to the space policy functions include:  Strategic fit: compatibility with the existing agency’s present role and functions,  People / capability : whether the agency has, or could acquire, what it would need now and in the future to deliver the interventions and outputs which best contribute to the outcomes government is seeking; and  Implementation : this includes consideration of whether the expansion would be cost effective without jeopardising the efficient, effective and economical management of the activities of the host agency. 41 MBIE and Ministry of Transport officials have undertaken a joint assessment of the preferred location using these criteria. Their conclusion is that the assessment criteria are broadly neutral in terms of which agency is the preferred location and that the choice for Ministers comes down to a judgement about the following two matters:  Strategic fit: MBIE’s Radio Spectrum team has expertise in radio spectrum policy and radio spectrum management, licensing and compliance, which is applicable to satellites and satellite licensing. MBIE is also the government’s lead advisor on growth and innovation policies. In both Australia and the United Kingdom (UK) the policy lead agency is hosted by agencies with substantially 9 7yr8upqmdi 2016-03-31 09:42:41 Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act similar responsibilities to those of MBIE.5 It is however ultimately a call for Ministers as to whether the host agency should have a greater focus on economic development/innovation (MBIE) or transport safety and system resilience (Ministry of Transport).  Implementation: MBIE is the larger policy agency and more able to marshal the resources required to develop the required policy capability. MBIE has been coordinating the development of the proposed regulatory regime for space activities and is more likely to be able to gear up and implement quickly. 42 I have discussed the preferred location for the space policy functions with the Minister of Transport, Hon Simon Bridges. The Ministry of Transport fulfils the role of regulation and investing for economic goals in the transport system. However, space launches and space applications have a broader economic development and innovation focus that extends beyond transport and into many areas of the economy and society. Through coordinating the development of the proposed space legislation, MBIE has begun to develop space policy expertise and is well placed to maintain the existing momentum in the development of the regulatory regime. 43 This leads us to conclude that MBIE should be the lead space policy agency for an initial period of three years. The proposed Space Activities Act will be reviewed three years after it is enacted. This review will provide a further opportunity for the government to consider which agency is best placed to host the lead space policy functions over the longer term taking into account developments in international space law and space policy and any changes to the civil aviation regime. Resourcing implications 44 Two general principles apply to how government agencies resource policy and regulatory functions. These are:  Crown funding for policy work; and  Third-party funding for regulatory work (this is consistent with the principle that those who benefit from the regulatory activity should pay for it). 5 The UK Space Agency is an executive agency of the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, and has responsibility for leading UK civil space policy, regulating UK civil space activities, and ensuring the UK meets international treaty obligations. In Australia, the Department of Industry, Innovation and Science is the central point of contact and coordination for the Government’s involvement in national and international civil space activities which are administered by a range of agencies. 10 7yr8upqmdi 2016-03-31 09:42:41 Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act 45 The Treasury guidelines for setting charges in the public sector identify a range of objectives for cost-recovery charges including reducing reliance on funding from general taxation; and dealing equitably with the tax payer, those who benefit from the service, and/or those whose actions give rise to it. 46 These general principles have been applied to the proposed space policy and space regulatory functions identified above to provide an initial estimate of the resourcing implications of the new functions and how these will be met. The detailed analysis is attached in Annex 2. In summary, this analysis supports the following proposals:  Once the proposed space legislation is enacted, licensing fees on industry participants will be used to recover the costs associated with the regulatory functions (An implementation work stream has been established to develop the approach to approving and monitoring Rocket Lab’s launches and payloads in 2016 and developing detailed procedures for approving and monitoring rocket launches and payloads once the Act comes into force. This work will provide a baseline estimate of the costs which will be recovered through license fees).  Until the legislation is enacted, the costs associated with developing and implementing the regulatory regime will be absorbed within agency baselines as the process involves a degree of capability building by agencies and there are public good reasons for meeting these costs from Crown funding.  The costs associated with developing space policy will be met from Crown funding as is usual for funding government policy advice. Should MBIE continue to be the lead agency, it will address any budgetary pressures associated with taking on these functions as part of its next four year plan in the 2017 Budget. If the Ministry of Transport took on these functions it would also need to address any budgetary pressures in the 2017 Budget. Consultation 47 The following agencies have been consulted: The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, the Ministry of Transport, the New Zealand Defence Force, the Ministry of Defence, the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, the New Zealand Police, the New Zealand Security Intelligence Service, the Government Communications Security Bureau, the State Services Commission, the New Zealand Treasury and Land Information New Zealand. Financial Implications 48 There are financial implications associated with the development of a space policy and space regulatory capabilities. The general resourcing principles adopted in this paper are that the costs of policy work should be met through Crown funding and the costs of regulatory work should be met by the parties who benefit from the regulatory activity. The set up costs associated with developing the new regulatory regime will be absorbed by agencies until the new legislation is passed. An implementation work stream has just been established which will identify the resourcing implications associated with the new space regulatory functions. Further advice on this will be provided to Cabinet as part of a subsequent paper seeking approval for regulations to enable cost recovery of the regulatory functions. With respect to the costs of the new space policy functions, I 11 7yr8upqmdi 2016-03-31 09:42:41 s 9(2)(f)(iv) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act propose that the lead agency for space policy address any budget implications in 2017 Budget. Human Rights 49 N/A Legislative Implications 50 This paper does not have legislative implications. Final policy approvals for the proposed legislation will be sought in a subsequent Cabinet paper expected to be submitted to the Cabinet Committee on Economic Growth and Infrastructure in April 2016. Regulatory Impact Analysis 51 The RIA requirements do not apply to this paper as it relates to the internal governance arrangements for space policy and for the administration of the proposed space activities legislation. Publicity 52 No publicity is planned in relation to the contents of this paper. However, once the TSA negotiations have been concluded, I propose to issue a media statement noting that New Zealand is developing legislation to enable safe, secure, responsible and sustainable space launches to take place and providing information to the public about their opportunity to submit on the content of the Bill. Recommendations The Minister for Economic Development recommends that the Committee: 1 Note that Rocket Lab’s intention to establish a commercial satellite launch business in New Zealand has meant that New Zealand is rapidly developing a space policy and regulatory capability to meet our obligations as a launch state, and manage the safety and security issues arising from frequent launches; 53 Note that a space policy capability will enable New Zealand to capitalise on emerging economic opportunities, advance our interests in space, manage international obligations, and assist in developing international arrangements to ensure the responsible use of space; 54 Note that in December 2015 Cabinet approved the high-level design of a regulatory regime to enable space launches from New Zealand, with legislation to be enacted during 2016, and directed officials to report back with further advice on the scope of space policy and on space agencies (CAB 15 Min 0274 refers); 55 Note the scope of space policy encompasses the totality of New Zealand’s interests in space including economic development, national security, foreign policy, safety and the environment and that it includes space launch, satellites, satellite applications and technologies operating at very high altitudes; 56 Note the proposed guiding objectives for space policy are to: 12 7yr8upqmdi 2016-03-31 09:42:41 Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act  Facilitate the development of a safe and responsible space industry including managing effects on Earth, in space and on other users;  Promote the use of satellite and very high altitude vehicle applications;  Ensure the equitable, efficient and sustainable access to satellite orbits and radio spectrum resources used for space services;  Preserve and advance New Zealand’s position in space and access to space capabilities;  Ensure New Zealand’s international rights and obligations in the use of space are met and that the Government’s liabilities as a launching state are managed adequately ; and  Enhance and protect national security; 57 Note that in order to meet the objectives in recommendation 5 above, a lead space policy agency will have the following functions:  Policy advice (including research, information gathering, monitoring and evaluation, and strategic planning). The policy function also includes ongoing risk assessment and advice on how the government can manage its liability associated with being a launching state in the context of a rapidly evolving commercial market, and the development of strategies to manage this liability and pass it on to the space launch and payload operators;  Develop and maintain (jointly with MFAT) New Zealand’s international relationships and international obligations for space. (Defence will continue to manage military-to-military relationships); and  Domestic coordination of information and advice across the various policy dimensions. This is likely to be a significant part (e.g. up to 80%), of the policy advice function; 58 Note the draft legislation establishes the following regulatory functions:  Authorisation of space launches, payloads and satellites;  National security considerations;  Registration of space objects;  Monitoring and enforcement;  Accident investigation;  Designation of secure areas;  Issuing of security cards; and  Education, information and guidance for industry participants; 13 7yr8upqmdi 2016-03-31 09:42:41 Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act 59 Agree that the nature and scale of the proposed space policy and regulatory functions does not justify the establishment of a standalone agency; 60 Agree that the space policy functions be located within an existing agency based on the best strategic fit and alignment with existing mandate and capability; 61 Agree that the authorisation functions are closely associated with the policy grounds for assessing a license application and that these functions should be kept with the lead space policy agency; 62 Agree that a domestic cross-agency coordination committee is established to integrate space policy advice across the range of agencies with space interests, and that the space policy agency will provide a secretariat for the committee; 63 Note that the two candidates to lead space policy are the Ministry of Transport or the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE); 64 Note that either MBIE or the Ministry of Transport could be the primary agency for the space regulatory functions, but that in practice different regulatory agencies will be involved in different regulatory functions and this is being worked through as part of the implementation work stream that MBIE has commenced; 65 Agree that space launches and space applications have a broad economic development and innovation focus that extends into many areas of the economy and society, and that this, along with the need to maintain momentum in the development of the proposed space legislation, means that MBIE is best placed to be the lead space policy agency for an initial period of three years. 66 Agree that the location of the lead space policy agency will be reconsidered as part of the required review of the proposed Space Activities Act (three years after the legislation is enacted) and that the review will take into account developments in international space law and space policy, as well as any changes to the civil aviation regime 67 Direct the lead space policy agency to report back to the responsible Minister with advice on:  A domestic coordination mechanism to provide Ministers with integrated and cohesive advice on space policy (June 2016);  A New Zealand space policy, including an assessment of opportunities for New Zealand from satellite applications and a strategy to exploit their utilisation (October 2016); 68 Note that when the proposed legislation is enacted, licensing fees on industry participants will be used to recover the costs associated with the regulatory functions; 69 Agree that until the proposed legislation is enacted, the costs associated with developing and implementing the regulatory regime shall be absorbed within agency baselines as the process involves a degree of capability building by agencies and there are public good reasons for meeting these costs from Crown funding; 70 Agree that the ongoing costs associated with space policy work will be met from Crown funding; 14 7yr8upqmdi 2016-03-31 09:42:41 Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act 71 Note that taking on these functions will be addressed as part of that agency’s four year plan in the 2017 Budget; 72 Note that officials will report to the Cabinet Committee for Economic Growth and Infrastructure in April 2016 to seek final policy approvals to enable the proposed legislation to be introduced into the House in May 2016. Authorised for lodgement Hon Steven Joyce Minister for Economic Development 15 7yr8upqmdi 2016-03-31 09:42:41 s 9(2)(f)(iv) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Annex 1- International Space Treaties and Institutions UN Space Treaties and Convention sResponsible body Description Radio frequency spectrum Treaties and ConventionsResponsible BodyDescription Outer Space TreatyUnited Nations Committee on the Peaceful Use of Outer Space (COPUOS). New Zealand is not a member of COPUOS. The Secretariat for COPUOS is United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs (Vienna)Principles governing the activities of states in the exploration and use of outer space, including the moon and other celestial bodies. New Zealand has ratified this treaty.International Radio Regulations (Treaty)International Telecommunic ations Union (ITU). The ITU is a UN specialised body. The Secretariat for the ITU is in Geneva.Manages the international radio- frequency spectrum and satellite orbits resources. New Zealand is a member and ratified the Treaty in 2014. Liability ConventionCOPUOS Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects. New Zealand has ratified this treaty.ITU Constitution and ConventionITU Coordinates efforts to eliminate harmful interference between radio stations of different countries and to improve the use made of the radio- frequency spectrum for radio communications services and of the geostationary-satellite and other satellite orbits. Registration ConventionCOPUOS Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into Outer Space. New Zealand has not yet ratified this treaty. Rescue ConventionCOPUOS Agreement on the Rescue, the Return of Astronauts and the Return of Objects Launched into Outer Space New Zealand has ratified this treaty. Moon Treaty COPUOS Agreement Governing the Activities of States on the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies. New Zealand has not ratified this treaty. Non-UN Agreements: International Telecommunications Satellite Organisation. Promotes public satellite communications. NZ is a member. 16 7yr8upqmdi 2016-03-31 09:42:41 Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Annex 2: Proposed space policy and space regulatory functions and resourcing implications Policy functions Activities Agencies New / expanded functionsActivities to be carried out before Rocket Lab’s first test launchResourcing implications (short-term / long term) Policy advice. This includes: environmental scanning; research; stakeholder engagement; development of advice (e.g. in relation to managing the government’s liability as a space launching state, and the economic opportunities associated with satellite applications); strategic planning; monitoring and evaluation.Early activities will be the development of a New Zealand space policy, and putting in place the information systems and processes necessary to undertake a review of the regulatory regime in three to five years (as will be required by the legislation).The lead space policy agency will have primary responsibility for these activities.New Policy development activities related to the development of the new regulatory regime are being undertaken by MBIE. Going forward this work will be led by the responsible agency for space policy. The costs of policy activities associated with the design of the regulatory regime are being met from within MBIE’s baselines. Once the legislation is passed, it is estimated that a policy capability of three to five FTEs will be required
Restricted Regulatory Impact Statement (RIS): Outer Space and High Altitude Activities Bill Agency Disclosure Statement Th is RIS has been prepared by the Ministry of Business Innovation and Employment. It summarises the analysis of options to provide a legal regime for space and certain high altitude activities taking place from New Zealand. The need for this legislation has been precipitated by the intention of a company, Rocket Lab, to commence space launches from New Zealand; and the negotiation of a Technology Safeguards Agreement (TSA) with the US Government to enable the transfer of sensitive technologies from the US to New Zealand. legislation should follow on quickly to provide certainty and alleviate risk. Normally this paper would follow the advice to the Government on the TSA (as the legislation is required for New Zealand to ensure full compliance with the TSA) but because of the critical path to facilitate the first rocket launch, legislative drafting needs to commence in advance of the conclusion of the TSA. The broader cost benefit analysis associated with a rocket industry in New Zealand will be contained in the advice to Ministers on the TSA and in the National Interest Analysis. This paper focuses on the cost benefit analysis associated with the enabling legislation (assuming that the TSA will be concluded). Legislation is also required to give effect to other international Space Treaty obligations that New Zealand is party to but has not previously had to ensure compliance with because we have not had a space launch industry. The requirement for domestic law to enable New Zealand to ensure it can fully comply with its TSA and other international obligations means there is limited discretion. Given this, the proposals have been informed by established best practice with respect to national legislation for space activities, in particular the UK Outer Space Act 1986 and the United Nations General Assembly resolution 68/74 on recommendations on national legislation relevant to the peaceful exploration and use of outer space (November 2014). While it is possible to deviate from international best practice legislation for space activities, conforming means that we can be confident that we can meet our international obligations. During the development of the space regulatory regime, we became aware of a range of technologies being developed to operate at very high altitudes (near space) and performing similar functions to satellites, including Earth observation, internet connectivity and surveillance activities. In order to future proof the space activities regime for developments in technology, and to ensure that different technologies providing similar applications and services are treated consistently, it is proposed that certain high altitude activities be brought within the scope of the space regime. With one exception (relating to the need to meet certain international obligations such as the TSA), the problem definition, policy objectives, key choices and conclusions are the same for the high altitude regime as the space regime. Given this, the inclusion of high altitude activities is an extension of scope at the margin and it does not justify a separate RIS. Instead the RIS has been updated to include the regulatory impact analysis produced on the high altitude regime. The Minister for Science and Innovation has requested that legislation be introduced into the House prior to Rocket Lab’s first test launch. This has constrained the time available to undertake the RIA. We have identified the key legal obligations and policy considerations that the regulatory 7yr8upqmdi 2016-06-08 10:27:02 s 9(2)(h) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Restricted regime needs to provide for. However, within the time available we have not fully worked through all of the matters associated with implementing the regime. A further report back to Cabinet in April 2016 provided further advice on the scope of space policy and space agencies. The decisions in this paper did not require a RIS to be produced. We have consulted with relevant government agencies and their comments have been incorporated into the Cabinet papers and RIS. We have also consulted with Rocket Lab who is the only private entity (that we know of) with plans to undertake space launches from New Zealand within the next 12 months. Consultation with the wider public will take place when the Bill is before the Select Committee. Simon Rae Manager, Innovation Policy 20 May 2016 Executive summary 1 .The key issue is how best to provide a fit-for-purpose legal framework for space and certain high altitude activities from New Zealand that enables New Zealand to fully implement our international obligations, facilitate the development of safe, secure and responsible space activities, and manage liability to the Crown that arises from our international obligations. 2. The analysis concludes that a new law is required. Internationally, space launch legislation is based on a licensing regime (an overarching licence to launch a space object with specific requirements implemented through licence conditions) that provides the necessary controls over participation in space launches, including powers to veto launches and/or payloads (i.e. cargos). Given this, we propose that a licensing regime is put in place. 3. Choices around the content of the regulatory regime are largely constrained by what is necessary in order to comply with international obligations, including the draft TSA which contains obligations of an absolute nature. However there are choices around: How prescriptive or permissive the regime is; and Whether or not the government transfers all liability associated with space launches, or chooses a risk-sharing approach. 4. On the first matter, we propose to adopt a permissive regime that will provide the minimum necessary to meet our international obligations and manage risks and not impose unnecessary compliance on space launch operators. A permissive approach involves giving the decision on the conditions of the licence to a decision-maker, rather than providing the detailed conditions in the primary legislation. The case for recommending this approach is largely based on the evolving nature of space activities and, in particular, the shift from large and very expensive satellites to micro and relatively low cost satellites, and relatively low cost and frequent launches. A fit-for-purpose legal framework needs to meet New Zealand’s international obligations and provide basic protections, but not stifle the development of a domestic space industry by imposing excessive costs. In an environment of rapidly changing space technologies and related market demand, our judgment is that this is best achieved through tailored licence conditions that take into account the particular circumstances and risks. 5. Under the Outer Space Treaty and the Liability Convention (two of the main international space treaties) the State assumes liability for space objects. These include launch vehicles 7yr8upqmdi 2016-06-08 10:27:02 Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Restricted and satellites, but the State does not create the risks nor is best placed to manage them. These are matters for the owners/operators of space objects. In light of this other governments pass off liability to owners/operators, both through stating in legislation that they have liability, and through the requirement for insurance. However some governments, such as the US, take a risk-sharing approach with the objective of encouraging the development of the space industry. 6. For the New Zealand legal framework we have considered two options. The first is to include a provision in primary legislation that the Government will seek an indemnity for liability, with the level of insurance to be set in licence conditions. This makes it cear that licence holders will have liability, but allows the Government to cap that liability through setting insurance requirements that reflect its assessment of risk and consequences. The alternative is for the primary legislation to stay silent on liability and include a provision for the Government to transfer liability through insurance requirements (but stay silent on the policy position thus providing maximum flexibility for future governments). 7. Space and certain high altitude activities create risks for national security, safety and for the environment. New legislation is required to manage national security risks. For the most part safety will be dealt with under existing domestic law (the Health and Safety in Employment Act 1992, which is to be replaced by the Health and Safety at Work Act 2015 from April 4, 2016) which creates general obligations on space launch operators. There may, howver, be particular safety concerns that arise from high-frequency launches or particular payloads which over time may require a more proactive approach to safety. Hence, it is proposed that the primary legislation make provision for safety related licence provisions. Similarly the Resource Management Act will largely address environmental risks. However, there may be environmental impacts in space that we don’t yet know about or that fall outside of the scope of the RMA. Hence, it is proposed that the primary legislation make provision for environmental protection related licence provisions. Outer Space regime Status quo 8. R ocket Lab (a US company with a New Zealand subsidiary) is proposing to commence space launches from New Zealand in early 2016 offering a dedicated launch service for small satellites. 9. The initial test-launch and any subsequent launches are contingent upon New Zealand concluding and implementing a treaty-level Technology Safeguards Agreement (TSA) with the United States (US) Government. The TSA enables the transfer of sensitive US technologies from the US to New Zealand and imposes obligations on New Zealand in relation to the use and secure management of the technologies. The majority of the obligations are to ensure compliance by Rocket Lab and third parties such as Rocket Lab’s contractors with the provisions of the TSA. Negotiations between New Zealand and the US on the TSA are underway and a separate Cabinet paper will be prepared seeking approval to sign, implement and bring into force the TSA. 10. Although rockets are to some extent regulated by Civil Aviation Rule part 101, New Zealand has no comprehensive regulatory regime designed for space launches and the operation of payloads (e.g. satellites) in space,
Results from Colmar-Brunton ticket reselling survey
Retain and hold fast to your mana, be bold, be brave
Retention rate of residents was high and had been slowly increasing
Rethinking the future of New Zealand infrastructure
Retirement Commissioner (Te Ara Ahunga Ora Retirement Commission)
Retirement Commissioner's review
Retirement Villages Retirement villages must register with the Companies Office under the Retirement Villages Act 2003 . They must also confirm key information and provide financial statements annually. The current fees were last adjusted in 2011. The fees for retirement villages are made up of two components: • fees paid by retirement village operators to the Registrar of Retirement Villages (the Registrar) to cover all costs incurred from setting up and maintaining the Retirement Villages register along with all duties and functions required by the Retirement Villages Act 2003; and • land transfer fees which enable the Registrar to notify the Registrar -General of Land of a retirement village’s registration. The notification is the trigger for the Registrar -General to place a memorial on land titles, providing priority for the rights of residents ahead o f the rights of holders of security interests. Table 2 3 on the next page shows the proposed adjustments to the two components of fee paid by retirement villages. Land transfer fee amounts are not included as they are out of scope of this review , but a change is required to how these are prescribed in regulations . Friendly Societies and Credit Unions registers Current fee – $ (GST exclusive ) Reason for revoking Copy per page under section 5(4) of the Friendly Societies and Credit Unions (Fees) Regulations 1992 . 0.27 Service no longer provided . Annul return filed more than three months after close of the financial year (Part 1 and Part 2 of the Friendly Societies and Credit Unions (Fees) Regulations 1992 ). 17.78 An overdue fee is not applied to other annual return filings for other registers . On application for confirmation of an amalgamation, transfer of engagements, or conversion into a company under section 86(1) of the Act 355.56 This service has not been provided in 25 years, as the Registrar has not received an application under this section and it is anticipated that this service can be managed with no additional fee. For filing an instrument of dissolution under section 94 (as applied by section 140(1)) of the Act. 311.11 Following an amendment to the Act in 2019, credit unions cannot be removed from the register by filing an instrument of dissolution. For filing, under section 82(3) (as applied by section 135(4) of the Act, a copy of a special resolution passed for the purpose of amalgamation or transfer of engagements. 133.33 The description of the fee in regulations no longer matches the changes made to the Act in 2019.
Return economy airfares to the United States
Review Framework for Schedule 2, List of Occupational Diseases [PDF 371KB]
Review and refine migrant exploitation allegation triage processes.
Review framework for list of occupational diseases
Review into administration of work force visa scheme released
Review of "Evaluating the New Zealand Screen Production Grant"
Review of December 2021 credit law changes
Review of Digital Records
Review of Government investment in the screen sector
Review of New Zealand Companies Office Fees and Levies (202 5) 2 How to have your say Submissions process The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) is seeking written submissions on proposals for fees and levies that would recover the costs of operating the New Zealand Companies Office (the Companies Office) and its associated statutory regist ers. The Companies Office is a business unit within MBIE. This discussion document includes some questions you may like to respond to in your submission. The questions are listed in the boxes throughout this document and listed in full in Appendix One: Summary of Questions . Your submission does not need to answer all these questions. Where possible, please include evidence to support your views, for example, references to facts and figures, or relevant examples. All fees and levies proposed in this document are GST exclusive , unless stated otherwise . This discussion document is available on MBIE’s website here: https://www.mbie.govt.nz/have - your -say/ Please send your written submission on the proposals and questions raised in this document by 5.00pm on Friday 13 June 2025. Please include your name, or the name of your organisation, and contact details. You can make your submission by: • attaching your submission as a Microsoft Word or PDF attachment and sending to companiesofficesub@mbie.govt.nz ; or • mailing your submission to: Companies Office Fees and Levies Review Ministry of Business, Innovation, and Employment PO Box 1473 Wellington 6140 New Zealand Please direct any questions you may have about the submission process to: companiesofficesub@mbie.govt.nz Next steps and implementation Once we have considered the submissions, we will develop the final proposals. If these proposals are approved by Cabinet, they will form the basis of revised regulations under the various pieces of legislation that regulate the fees and levies considered i n this document. Please see the section Purpose of this document for a proposed timeline of key milestones. Final fees and levies are set to apply from 1 December 2025 unless otherwise stated in this document. You can expect to hear about the final changes to fees and levies before they take effect . Use of information The information provided in the submissions will be used to inform MBIE’s proposed final options in its advice to the Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs . We may contact submitters directly if we require clarification of any matters in submissions. 3 Except for material that may be defamatory, MBIE may post PDF copies of submissions received to the MBIE website at www.mbie.govt.nz . By making a submission, we will consider that you have agreed to us posting your submission on the MBIE website, unless you specify otherwise in your submission. Release of information Submissions are subject to requests made under the Official Information Act 1982 . If you object to the release of any information in your submission, please clearly indicate which parts you consider should be withheld and include your reasons for withholding the information. MBIE will consider any objections you note and consult with you when responding to requests under the Official Information Act 1982 , but MBIE make the final decision on what should be released as required by law. Please indicate on the front of your submission if it contains confidential information and mark the text accordingly. If you wish to make a submission which includes confidential information, please send us a separate version excluding the relevant inform ation for publication on our website and release as required by law. Personal information The Privacy Act 2020 establishes certain principles with respect to the collection, use and disclosure of personal information about individuals by various agencies, including MBIE. Any personal information you supply to MBIE as part of your submission will only be used to he lp inform the development of policy advice in relation to this review. Please clearly indicate in your submission if you do not wish your name to be included in any summary of submissions that we may publish. We advise caution on what y ou include in the free text response. Please do not provide more personal information than is necessary for the purposes of this consultation . Providing this information is optional . Your personal information will be securely held by MBIE in limited access folders. You have a right to ask for a copy of any personal information we hold about you because of this consultation, and to ask for it to be corrected if you think it is wrong. If you would like to ask for a copy of your information, or to have it corrected, please contact us at companiesofficesub@mbie.govt.nz . Permission to reproduce The copyright owner authorises reproduction of this work, in whole or in part, so long as no charge is being made for the supply of copies, and the integrity and attribution of the work as a publication of MBIE is not interfered with in any way. ISBN: 978 -1-99-106930 -6 (Online) Published 2 May 2025 [first edition] In force from 2 May 2025
Review of New Zealand Companies Office Fees and Levies (2025)
Review of Sapere Report Evaluating the New Zealand Screen Production Grant
Review of consumer credit law
Review of consumer law 2010-2015
Review of electricity market performance
Review of insurance contract law - options paper: quick submissions
Review of section 36 of the Commerce Act and other matters
Review of the Copyright Act 1994
Review of the Outer Space and High-altitude Activities Act 2017 - terms of reference [PDF 209KB]
Review of the Outer Space and High-altitude Activities Act 2017 Terms of Reference Section 86 of the Outer Space and High-altitude Activities Act 2017 (the Act') requires the Minister for Economic and Regional Development ('the Minister'), as Minister responsible for the Act's administration, to: • As soon as practicable after three years from the Act's commencement , commence a review of the operation and effectiveness of the Act and prepare a report on that review; and • Present the report to the House of Representatives as soon as practicable after its completion. The Review of the Act will consider: • the operation and effectiveness of the Act, since the Act came into force on 21 December 2017; • whether the provisions of the Act should be retained or repealed; and • whether any further amendments to the Act are necessary or desirable. In carrying out the review, the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE), as the administering agency of the Act, will assess the Act's operation and effectiveness through, inter alia, considering the following: • Alignment of provisions with intent (e.g. do the provisions in the Act allow the purposes to be met?); • Efficient (e.g. do they impose minimum compliance costs on the regulated entities and agencies involved in administering the Act, and do they result in the provision of timely and comprehensive information to inform decision-making?); • Certain and predictable (e.g. does the regime provide a sufficient level of certainty and predictability to regulated entities?); • Flexible (e.g. given that this is an area of rapid technology change, is the Act sufficiently technology neutral); • Transparent (for the regulated entities and the general public). There is no legislative requirement to review the Outer Space and High-altitude Activities (Definition of High-altitude Vehicle) Regulations 2017 and Outer Space and High-altitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulations 2017, but these will be considered within the Review to ensure the regime as a whole is operating effectively . The following process will be led by MBIE officials: • Collect views (including from government ag~ncies and industry stakeholders) regarding the operation and effectiveness of the provisions of the Act. • Identify how the Act and regulations can be improved operationally . • Taking into account the consultation, prepare and present a final report to the Minister by 15 December 2021 .
Review of the Rapid Building Assessment System
Review of the Telecommunications Relay Service
Review of the building consent system (snapshot)
Review of the rapid building response
Review support available to migrant victims of people trafficking in New Zealand.
Review this funding contract template before applying as this will be the contract you will agree to if you are funded.
Reviewing and updating adventure activity safety guidance
Reviewing and updating adventure activity safety guidance.
Reviewing new and major amendments to this policy and any associated procedures
Reviewing prosecution files and recommendations
Reviewing regulated ACC payments for treatment
Reviews across Government
Reviews decisions by Work and Income
Reviews of the Commerce Act 1986
Revise, renew, re-engineer
Revised Domestic Travel Survey data series
Revisions and improvements
Revisions to the Regulations from 29 March 2023
Rich information and analysis of a range of tourism issues
Richard Griffiths, Deputy Secretary, Corporate and Digital Shared Services
Richard has a Bachelor of Commerce from the University of Auckland.
Richard started his career as an Accountant and Financial Analyst before moving into organisational development, leadership and change roles.
Rights of access and correction
Rights of postal operators
Risk Assessment and Risk Management Plans prepared as part of the full assessment pathway
Risk Oversight Functions: Setting MBIE-wide expectations, policies and procedures (2nd Line)
Risk and Hazard Management Plan To mitigate the unique risks related to the safety and security of these operations a r isk and h azard management plan is required as part of the ODMP, which contains : + Detailed analysis of risks and hazards at each stage of mission + Steps taken to address hazards and minimise or avoid risks + Consideration of the characteristics of, and hazards associated with, the client object part. Communication Plans ADR and OOS payload permit applications should also contain a communications plan. Communication and transparency around planned ADR and OOS operations are important in mitigating the risk of third -party operators and states misinterpreting the behaviour of ADR and OOS satellites and intent of their operators . NZSA expects the communication plan theref ore contains details on: + How the operator plans to provide information on the planned activity and in the event of an anomaly to: • the regulator (MBIE) • third -party operators • the general public . + Provision for communication and coordination between entities t hat could be affected by the servi cing operation to avoid misinterpretation of behaviours or harmful interference . + Provision for consultation with other states in the event of potential accidental harmful interference . Insurance and Liability Requirements for liability insurance for ADR and OOS payloads are assessed on a case -by-case basis , based on the risks associated with each mission . The applicant may be required to hold liability insurance that would indemnify the Crown against claims (up to a set value) made against New Zealand under the Liability Convention. Jurisdiction and O wnership of S pace Objects Active debris removal and on -orbit servicing payload permit applicants will require an agreement with the debris object owner establishing consent for the proposed servicing operation. Payload permit applicants may be required to present a n agreement with the state that has registered the client space object and the entity which holds the proprietary right to the object . This agr eement should stipulate that the permit applicant has the necessary consent to execute and deliver the service, the service complies with relevant regulations of the client object registration state and that, where necessary , any changes to the client obje ct appear in an update to the object’s registration with the United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs (UNOOSA). Applicants should also provide NZSA with contact information for the client object owner and operator.
Risk and crisis management
Risks associated with non-structural elements
Robert Pigou Deputy Secretary Regional Development & Commercial Services
Robert Pigou, Deputy Secretary, Regional Development & Commercial Services
Robert has been a member of the Institute of Directors since 2016.
Robert has extensive experience in the corporate finance and banking sectors both in New Zealand and Asia. He has held senior leadership roles at EY, AsiaPower Developments Limited and Lloyds Bank, The National Bank of New Zealand and Southpac.
Robert is Deputy Secretary, Regional Development & Commercial Services which manages a number of Government funding initiatives.
Robin has designed and built ground stations in Antarctica, Tokelau and Southland.
Robin supervises post-graduate students undertaking space research and SpaceOps New Zealand employs undergraduate engineering students in summer jobs.
Robyn Kamira Māori telecommunications and technology industry representative
Rocket Lab MBIE COMMENT The SPRS team has suggested that creating a ‘single purpose enforcement officer’ in the Act (with powers relating to debris protection areas) would allow Rocket Lab staff (or other launch operators) to have the powers they need to maintain these areas, and the legal distinction would help to clarify their role. ROCKET LAB Rocket Lab acknowledges that New Zealand’s international obligations to protect sensitive technologies are substantial. They caution, however, that the option to delegate New Zealand’s ob ligation to operators in New Zealand must be carefully considered, and advise that “obligations delegated should be proportional to the risk, consider the equivalent protections required (or not required) of operators of the same technologies overseas, and balance the economic risk to the development of the industry in New Zealand from burdening commercial operators of space systems against the cost of employing New Zealand’s existing security infrastructure to meet those obligations.” Rocket Lab’s submissi on also stated that that powers and offences in the Act “include ambiguities and scope for interpretation that Rocket Lab is not confident could be applied by a commercial enterprise in a way that would be seen to be universally fair and impartial.” OSHAA section 64 sets out powers that can be used to protect a debris protection area that may be required for New Zealand to meet its Technology Safeguard Agreement (TSA) obligations. The Review recommends that the relevant legislative provisions are amended to create a ‘debris protection area officer’ role that is distinct from the role of an enforcement officers who promote/investigate compliance with the Act. The role of a debris protection officer would be to protect sensitive technology in the event of an incident that results in debris that are sufficiently intact to require the technology to be protected pending the arrival of an enforcement officer. We disagree with Rocket Lab that requiring an operator to perform this role is inappropriate or disprop ortionate. An operator reaps the benefits from using sensitive technologies and accordingly must bear some of the cost associated with its protection. An operator will generally also be in the best position to manage the risks in the immediate aftermath of an incident. We do not consider a debris protection officer should be able to exercise intrusive powers such as the power of arrest or the ability to use force. However, they should have the power to issue reasonable directions to ensure the protection of sensitive technology, breach of which would be an offence.
Rocket Lab offers apprenticeship positions for high school leavers and technicians in New Zealand wanting to gain on-the-job qualifications. These are posted on the Rocket Lab careers website as they become available and have various entry requirements. To find out more email
Rocket and satellite construction
Rocket engines and satellite thrusters
Rockets, spaceplanes and satellites
Role of the New Zealand government
Roles and responsibilities
Round 1 funding recipients
Round 1 of the Regional Events Promotion Fund awarded $2,375,000 of funding to 132 events in July 2024.
Round 2 funding recipients
Round 3 funding recipients
Round 4 funding recipients
Round 5 funding recipients
Round 6 funding recipients
Round 7 funding recipients
Royal Commission of Inquiry into the terrorist attack on Christchurch mosques on 15 March 2019
Royal Commission of Inquiry into the terrorist attacks on Christchurch mosques on 15 March 2019
Royal Society of New Zealand
Rule 18A: Quality employment outcomes
Rules governing the exploration and use of outer space
Rural Broadband Initiative
Rural Broadband Initiative Phase 1
Rural Broadband Initiative phase two (RBI2)
Rural Capacity Upgrade Programme (RCU)
Rural Couriers Society Ltd (Coural)
S ince we met with you in late February, our focus has been on progressing alternatives to some of the 2020 Cabinet policy decisions on changes to the Holidays
S ubmissi ons on the exposure draft will likely identify areas where further policy development and/or changes to the Bill would be
SEGREGATED AREAS The Technology Safeguards agreement includes a number of requirements aimed at protecting sensitive technologies including requirements to create segregated areas and requirements relating to the use of identity cards. Section s 63, 73 and 74 of the Act wer e intended to implement these requirements. Section 63 gives the Minister the power to declare segregated areas and areas set aside. These are supported by the offence provisions in sections 73 and 74 of the Act and a related transitional provision. Howeve r, experience with the operation of the Act has demonstrated that the most effective mechanism for ensuring consistency with these obligations is through the imposition of protective security requirements on Rocket Lab rather than through the government de claring segregated areas and areas set aside. SPRS team (MBIE)
SEO is a 4 level hierarchical classification with Sector at the broadest level. While the Sector forms part of the hierarchical structure of the SEO, it is however used only for the grouping of divisions and for publication of R&D data, not for data collection. Divisions, Groups and Objectives form the next three hierarchical levels in the SEO in decreasing order. Divisions, Groups, and Objectives are assigned unique 2-digit, 4-digit and 6-digit identification (ID) codes respectively.
SIGNED for and on behalf of The Crown by:
SIGNED for and on behalf of The Māori Spectrum Working Group by:
SPRS TEAM (MBIE) MBIE’s SPRS team advised that: • MBIE assesses compliance with the Technology Safeguards Agreement (TSA) are as part of its assessment of the consistency of licences and permits with international obligations. • The primary components of the TSA that are implemented specifically by the Act are the power to declare Debris Protection Areas and to inform the Mini ster of the intent to develop MTCR category 1 technology so the government may consult the US on the development of MTCR Category 1 technology. • Rocket Lab are actively working with other New Zealand agencies, such as WorkSafe and the NZSIS, to develop gui dance materials to ensure other agencies and sector partners are fully aware of their TSA obligations. • It is relevant to note that there have been no incidents involving debris and the Minister has not needed to invoke the power to declare a segregated are a. The Review notes that there are several mechanisms in place to ensure compliance with the TSA, including the imposition of protective security requirements on licensees. We agree the following provisions in the Act are unnecessary and should be rep ealed: • Section 5 (Segregated areas to be treated as security areas) • Section 63 (Segregated areas and areas set aside) • Section 73 (Offences relating to segregated areas and areas set aside) • Section 74 (Person in control of segregated area or area specially set aside to ensure identity cards displayed) • Section 77 (Failing to display identity card).
STATUTORY POWERS 36. The Act provides the following powers to support compliance with the regime. While not all have been invoked, it remains important that they continue to be available to the regulator. These powers include: • Request for Information: Section 50 of the Act empowers the Minister to ask an applicant or holder of any licence or permit under the Act to provide any information that the Minister requires for the purposes of performing functions or exercising powers under the Act in relation to the licence or permit. To date, there has been no cause to use this power. MBIE ensures that all requests for information to applicants come from officials with this delegated power. When applicants have been reluctant to provide informatio n (eg due to commercial sensitivity concerns) this has been resolved via negotiation or a revision of the request to encompass only necessary information, negating the need to formally invoke this power. Applicants have been highly compliant and have a str ong incentive to comply with requests for information, so it is not envisaged these powers will be invoked often. • Declaration of a debris protection area: Section 64 of the Act prescribes that the Minister may declare a debris protection area, if the Mini ster is satisfied that it is necessary to do so in order to comply with an y international agreement relating to the protection of sensitive space technology. The Minister has delegated this power to the Chief Executive of MBIE. The Chief Executive has not needed to invoke this power to date . • Sharing information with agencies: Section 85 prescribes statutory provisions which enable information to be shared across specified agencies. Officials routinely share information with other agencies as permitted at Se ction 85 where this is necessary for the performance of their respective regulatory functions . NON -STATUTORY PRACTICES TO SUPPORT COMPLIANCE Compliance strategy 37. MBIE ’s compliance strategy describes the overall approach to ensuring that people carrying out activities under the Act comply with the statutory requirements and with licence and permit conditions. 38. Whereas the guidance material is public -facing and designed for the regulated parties, the compliance strategy is designed for internal use by MBIE. 39. The document describes: • The key features of the regulatory regime relevant to the compliance strategy , such as: o Recognition of authorisations from some overseas regulators as meeting certain requirements under the Act for some licen ces or permit s3; and o that elements of some licensed activities fall under the remit of other New Zealand regulatory regimes. • The way MBIE works with its regulatory partners .
STRATUS is a six-year $12.2 million cyber security project led by the University of Waikato's Dr Ryan Ko and funded by us.
STRATUS soaring to the Cloud
Safe Mines: Safe Workers Quick Guide
Safe Operation of the Facility • A safety case to show what steps the applicant has taken, and will continue to take, to manage risks to public safety, including: o A description of the approach taken to the safety assessment o A description of the launch fac ility and its proposed operation including a description of all of the safety critical systems o Particulars of all relevant New Zealand and international standards that have been applied or will be applied in relation to the launch facility o A description o f the mechanisms used to make sure the facility is built to a safe standard and its operation is safe o Details of the key personnel responsible for the safety of the facility o A description of the geographical areas likely to be affected by the facility and if relevant demographic information about the local community that may be affected by it o A description of the known significant risks associated with the launch facility o A description of the control measures in place to mitigate those risks o An emergency management plan that describes the systems, process and procedures that will apply in the event of a major incident
Safeguarding Children website
Safer Workplaces consultation: Summary of submissions [PDF 1.3MB]
Safety Commitment and Goals 5
Safety Critical Systems and Safety Assessment 6
Safety • A safety case to show what steps the applicant has taken, and will continue to take, to manage risks to public safety , including : 20
Samoan Quota and Pacific Access Category settlement information pilot evaluation
Sandra Todd t/a Quick Post
Sarah Wilson and Philip Gregan, New Zealand Winegrowers
Satellites deliver a wide range of essential services that underpin daily life in New Zealand. Improving our capability to develop, access and use space technologies will deliver benefits for New Zealanders and demonstrate the capability of our space and advanced aviation sectors to the world.
Satisfaction with the overall experience of applying for a visa was:
Satisfying the Minister of Changes 9
Schedule 2: information required for any licence or permit application
Schedule 3: Information required for launch licence or overseas launch licence application
Schedule 4: Information required for payload permit or overseas payload permit application
Schedule 4A non-listed companies
Schedule 5: Information required for facility licence application
Schedule 6: Information required for high-altitude licence application
Scheduled application period
Scheduled funding and investment opportunities
Scheme payment recipients
Science System Advisory Group
Science System Advisory Group Report [PDF 1.4MB]
Science System Investment and Performance
Science Systems Advisory Group
Science Teaching Leadership Programme
Science and Innovation Counsellor, Europe, New Zealand Mission to the European Union
Science and Space Communication
Science and innovation announcements and news.
Science and innovation research and data
Science and innovation success stories
Science, Innovation and Technology
Scion is a Crown research institute that specialises in research, science and technology development for the forestry, wood product and wood-derived materials and other biomaterial sectors. Its purpose is to drive innovation and growth from these sectors to build economic value and contribute to beneficial environmental and social outcomes for New Zealand.
Scope of Space Policy and Lead Space Agency [PDF 575KB]
Screen sector data 2012 to 2021
Screen share allows our Client Services Advisors to view your computer screen and see exactly what you are seeing and doing in real time so that we can provide guidance to you where needed.
Screen share involves the Client Services Advisor viewing what is displayed on your computer screen. The Client Services Advisor cannot access or control your computer through Screen Share.
Screening tool questions to assist OT National Contact Centre and frontline social workers to identify child victims of trafficking were established in June 2021.
Screening tool to assist Oranga Tamariki National Contact Centre (NCC) and frontline social workers to identify child victims of trafficking will be finalised and implemented.
Seahorse Services Limited
Search and Surveillance Act 2012
Season One Memorandum of Understanding for the 5% Uplift
Second phase of Tui Oil Field decommissioning under way
Second phase: Environment
Secretariat for the Foundation is provided by MBIE.
Secretary for Business Innovation and Employment and Chief Executive (The Secretary)
Section 151(2) of the Companies Act 1993
Section 1: Consumer access to dispute resolution
Section 1: General information 1.1 Purpose MBIE is solely responsible for the analysis and advice set out in this Regulatory Impact Statement, except as otherwise explicitly indicated. This analysis and advice has been produced for the purpose of informing key (or in -principle) policy dec isions to be taken by Cabinet.
Section 208 of the Telecommunications Act 2001 provides for the Commerce Commission to review the regulation of the anchor services ahead of future regulatory periods and make recommendations to the Minister for any regulatory changes it determines necessary. Section 209 similarly provides for the Commerce Commission to review the regulation of DFAS from 2025 and at 5 year (minimum) intervals thereafter.
Section 2: Accessing shared property for fibre installations
Section 3 : Option identification 3.1 What options are available to address the problem? The Holid ays Act Taskforce considered a range of possible changes to the Act . This included core components of a holidays and leave system such as how entitlements should be calculated and paid, as well as more peripheral issues such as how availability provisions and closedowns should be treated . It focu sed on regulatory
Section 30 of the Crown Entities Act 2004
Section 324A of the Accident Compensation Act 2001
Section 3: Telecommunications levy settings
Section 3: Who is affected by the issues with the current Act? 1 Have we accurately captured the broad range of business arrangements that can contribute to difficulties with the Act?
Section 4: Identifying participants in the market
Section 4: What are the key issues with the Holidays Act 2003?
Section 5 : Ideas for change
Section 5: Enhancing information flow to the Emergency Location Information System
Section 62 of the Act grants constables the powers of a compliance officer under only parts of the Act . Constables do not have the powers of an Space, Policy and Regulatory Team (MBIE) By amending the Act in the way proposed, this would clarify constables to have all the powers an enforcement officer has und er the Act, including those in debris protection areas. The Review recommends that section 62 is refined along the lines of: “For the purpose of investigating compliance or taking reasonable steps to ensure compliance with this Act, regulations made under this Act, or the conditions of licences and permits issued under this Act, a constable may exercise any of the
Section 86 of the Outer Space and High -altitude Activities Act 2017 (‘the Act') requires the Minister for Economic and Regional Development ('the Minister'), as Minister responsible for the Act's administration, to: • As soon as practicable after three years from the Act's commencement, commence a review of the operation and effectiveness of the Act and prepare a report on that review; and • Present the report to the House of Representatives as soon as practicable after its completion.
Section one of the report is available in the following languages:
Securing unreinforced masonry building parapets and facades
Security of launch and of sensitive space technologies • An overview of protective security (including cybersecurity ) measures or policies in place to protect the launch vehicle telemetry a nd control, other launch systems and sensitive technology .
See Payloads approved for launch
See Stats NZ's website for information about New Zealand's inbound and outbound travel.
See Stats NZ's website for information about employment in select tourism industries by Regional Tourism Organisations (RTO). The indicators that have been developed are:
See all related documents
See also our NZRIS newsletters
See below for a link to the PDF version for printing.
See the SSAG website for more information:
See the Strategic fit section
See the full report here:
See what we are currently consulting on
Seeking an appropriation increase of $6 million
Seeking feedback on a proposed levy to recover Commerce Commission costs of regulating water services
Seeking feedback on an exposure draft of the Patents Amendment Bill
Seeking feedback on applying the consumer data right to banking and electricity
Seeking feedback on moving towards a financially sustainable mail service
Seeking feedback on telecommunications regulatory and funding frameworks
Seeking feedback on the purpose and performance of the work health and safety regulatory system.
Seeking feedback on updated Crown Minerals Act 1991 Programmes
Seeking feedback to improve competition in New Zealand
Seeking your feedback on work with engineered stone and materials containing crystalline silica
Seeks ministerial decisions on policy changes relating to the Holidays Act reform to be included in a Cabinet paper in May 2024.
Seismic Review Steering Group
Self-containment of motor caravans and caravans
Self-service tool which displays labour market information from many different sources
Send the completed Confidentiality Deed to
Send us an online enquiry
Senior Advisor, Employment Standards Policy
Series of A3s outlining design choices for changes to remedy settings.
Services will vary for people who need help for health or disability reasons. Some people will be able to return to work relatively quickly with support. Others may take longer to return to work and need more structured and intensive support. Income insurance provides the time for people to get this.
Servicing all regions all in New Zealand
Servicing over 1,000 Government and Non-Government Organisations across Australia and New Zealand, All Graduates facilitate more than 150,000 interpreting sessions each year, including face to face, telephone and video.
Set up in 2016, the New Zealand Space Agency is the lead government agency for space policy, regulation and business development.
Set up in 2016, the New Zealand Space Agency is the lead government agency for space policy, regulation and sector development.
Set up strategic investment in advanced technology research as a first step toward establishing a PRO focused on advanced technologies.
Sets out MBIE's expectations and rules governing prosecutions decision making and prosecution proceedings.
Sets out the procedures and guidelines to be followed by MBIE staff in making a decision to prosecute or to request appeals.
Sets out the scope and process for the review of the most efficient and effective arrangements for New Zealand's weather forecasting system.
Setting new fees for incorporated societies
Setting the average ACC levy rates for 2025/26, 2026/27, and 2027/28
Setting the minimum wage for 2023 - Cabinet Paper [PDF 292KB]
Settlement experience of Pacific migrants in New Zealand
Settling in New Zealand: Migrant Survey trends from 2015 to 2019
Settling in New Zealand: Migrant survey trends from 2015 to 2019 [PDF 578KB]
Several innovations, including short rotation crops and partial conversions of farms to forestry, could help increase biomass production with less competition for land.
Several projects were initiated in response to the recommendations. These include:
Shane Kinley, Employment Relations & Employment Standards System
Shanelle Dyer is an MSc Geography student at the University of Canterbury, using remote sensing and GIS for conservation. Her thesis focuses on counting Weddell seals in the Ross Sea Marine Protected Area (MPA) in Antarctica, in an effort to see how well MPAs protect our vulnerable marine life.
Sharing information about children
Sharing information with Japan for Immigration purposes
She is an early career Pasifika researcher, and the founding associate-director of All My Relations, an Indigenous research centre at Thompson Rivers University (Canada). She also co-founded the Indigenous research development program called Knowledge Makers in Canada.
She is currently the Secretary and Chief Executive of the Ministry of Business, Innovation & Employment (MBIE). The Ministry's purpose is to 'Grow New Zealand for
Shift the setting of the Telecommunications Development Levy amount from the Telecommunications Act into regulations
Shop employees have the right to refuse to work
Short-term employment forecasts
Short-term employment forecasts 2017-2020 - February 2018
Shortly prior to the 2023 General Election, the Government agreed to undertake a review of consumer credit law and make Regulations that apply consumer credit law to Buy Now Pay Later.
Should New Zealand introduce an income insurance scheme for job losses due to redundancy, layoffs or health conditions and disabilities? Please state, yes, or, no, and feel free to expand on why or why not.
Should Parliament support New Zealand becoming a party to the Protocol, New Zealand would then deposit the necessary instruments to become a party to the Protocol with the International Labour Organisation.
Should people be able to receive support for up to 12 months if they are in an approved training or rehabilitation programme? Extended support will mean higher levies, and may help some people return to work.
Show a genuine interest in science and research
Show a strong commitment to their principal field of study and to interdisciplinary work
Showing results 1 - 2 of 2 for
Showing results 1 - 5 of 5 for
Siaosi is in his late 50s and has worked a long career as a public defence lawyer.
Sign up for face to face interpreting services
Sign up for notifications
Sign up for telephone and video interpreting services
Sign up to MBIE's notification service to find out about upcoming board vacancies.
Sign up to news from the Resource Markets branch.
Sign up to receive New Zealand Space Agency updates.
Sign up to receive tourism data updates
Sign up to receive tourism sector alerts
Sign-up and select your topics of interest for email updates.
Signatures: Alison McDonald, Deputy Secretary Immigration, MBIE of New Zealand
Signed 8th day of December 2022
Significant government-led programmes are working to improve broadband and mobile connectivity for New Zealanders.
Similarities and differences with adult labour exploitation
Simon Humphries, Head of the Labour Inspectorate, emphasises the importance of understanding these regulations:
Simplified points system in depth
Simplifying the framework for paying AL as a regular part of an employee’s pay (pay - as - you - go
Since 1 July 2019, most international visitors to New Zealand have been charged the International Visitor Conservation and Tourism Levy (IVL). The IVL is set at $100 for each eligible visitor to New Zealand.
Since it began in 2007, the Recognised Seasonal Employer (RSE) Scheme has enabled employers in the horticulture and viticulture sector to recruit an annually capped number of seasonal workers from eligible Pacific Island countries to plant, maintain, harvest, or pack crops.
Since the Working Group delivered its report, the Employment Court delivered a judgment on the employment status of 4 Uber drivers. The decision has been appealed and this legal process will take some time to work through.
Since the first Canterbury earthquakes in 2010, we have investigated the impact and developed resources and guidance to help with the rebuild.
Since the late 1980s there have been a number of Treaty settlements to redress the impacts of colonisation. These settlements are generally between 1 and 2% of the total value of loss (as estimated by the Crown).
Singapore Declaration on Climate Change, Energy and the Environment
Site security and risk assessments [PDF 4.3MB]
Situational analysis of New Zealand's bioeconomy
Six tertiary students have been selected to work on NASA projects in the US.
Sky Network Television Ltd
Slide pack for Future of Work Forum on Good Work [PDF 391KB]
Small Business Digital Boost
Small Business and Manufacturing
Small business and manufacturing
Small claims up to $30,000
Smart invoicing capabilities
Smarter use of advanced technologies and more investment in capital will enable New Zealand businesses to be internationally competitive.
So that's going to be an aide memoire, for you in the workshops to see if there's anything that you can come up with that you think are useful things that are going to make a difference.
So the next thing is, how we can connect the twin to a wider city? So the potential is that we could connect our complex into the wider digital twin in the city. Maybe that could mean sharing information about transport links, and what's working and what's delayed. It could be about water, or management or even energy, you know, maybe the building's generating energy and we are swapping it back into the city and managing our energy and our costs in a different way. There's lots of opportunity there for a wider digital twin for the city. And for the users of the building that can be really helpful because if they've got an app or something, they can actually see what's happening around them and get local community information.
So there's a whole lot of opportunities there to manage the build and the construction, but also manage any changes that happen. And of course, sometimes with supply chains, particularly now we might get to the stage where we just can't get some material and we have to swap it out and tweak the design. And so we're in a good place to do that with all the information we've gathered already.
So this one here is Safe Swim. And this is looking at safe swimming for surfers. And as you can see, one of the aspects for it is the range of collaborations between different bodies to make this digital twin happen. And that's one of the things that with a digital twin, there'll be lots of people want to access the data, and for different purposes, so it's very much a collaborative.
So to those in the room and we have a number of people online as well. This is the workshop of the potential for digital technology to accelerate the transition to a circular economy. My name is James Griffin and I lead the circular economy work at Sustainable Business Network and together with Callum Blackburn from Aurecon and the host of facilitators and experts from Aurecon and ThinkStep we are going to lead you through the next two hours of insights and discussions.
So we've decided on our design, we've gone for that and looked at a number of cost efficiencies, utilising the data in a digital twin context and we've come up with a design we like. We are able to share that with all the users, and we're able to share that with all the stakeholders. And this slide here is a kind of representation of when we are in the procurement phase. So, we're looking at a range of different things that we can change in the procurement phase or select.
So, on the bottom of the slide on the right there you've kind of got like a digital passport for a range of materials. So we were looking at the steel construction and we're saying well okay, well if we use this material or that material what are the opportunities and the procurement. Some of it might be higher carbon but more long life. We have to make that decision choice and some of it might be better performing and give us other potential. So really in that procurement phase, we can look into these things. We can also have a digital twin linked to the supply chains. So that information could potentially come straight into a form of data storage that we have. And then we've got that for the future as we construct this building.
So, thank you in advance for your contribution.
So, then we've got the ability to take these adaptions and add all that information into the digital twin. But at the same time, when we're taking anything out, we can reuse it, we know what the materials are, we know what the equipment are, is, if there's any equipment that needs to be replaced, we've got details of that, you know, a digital representation, which allows things like maybe we could replace a part with something that's 3d printed, because we've got all the specs, we don't have to go and look for paper manuals to work out who actually supplied this 20 years ago.
So, there's a lot of ability there to make that that building more adaptable and keep the cost down when we do change things. So that's an example of what we might do. And obviously we were trying to make sure that we use things at highest value possible.
So, we have chosen an area in Wellington and what we have envisaged is that there's being a new complex built in a part of Wellington. It's a complex that has residential development, it has business spaces in it, and it has public spaces, perhaps a medical centre or something like that.
So, we're going to walk through an example that the Aurecon digital team have created. And it's a hypothetical example, but it gives us the opportunity to say to you, here's some of the things that could be in this digital twin. And here's some of the aspects that it could help with and get your brain juices going as to what the opportunity might be for you and your own particular area.
So, what did we do? What was the screening process?
So, when can we expect this Kiwi-German innovation to be orbiting above us?
Social Development and Employment
Social Dialogue as a Tool to Address Labour Market Challenges APEC Human Resource and Development Working Group [PDF 4.5mb]
Social Good Tapui Limited
Socio Economic Activity V1-2
Socio-Economic Objective V2
Software as a Service (SaaS) including mobile apps
Solar photovoltaic energy
Solicitor : Name of counsel who has filled in ROP Date: Date ROP filled in
Some Government Ministers are proactively releasing the titles of documents they receive from MBIE on a monthly basis. Note that these lists do not include briefings that accompany responses to Official Information Act requests the Minister receives.
Some catered meals (details TBC closer to the date)
Some documents may contain redacted information. Any documents with redacted information will include an explanatory note about why that information has been redacted (this may be on the cover sheet included with the document, or an annotation on the redacted information).
Some documents may contain redacted information. Any documents with redacted information will include an explanatory note about why that information has been redacted.
Some employers know that migrant workers can be afraid to report exploitation at work, especially if migrants are:
Some examples of scientific payloads that have been launched from New Zealand include:
Some examples of technology demonstration payloads that have been launched from New Zealand include:
Some financial market participants must disclose their climate-related risks and opportunities in annual climate statements.
Some information has been withheld due to the f ree and frank expression of opinion.
Some information has been withheld for the reasons of privacy of natural persons, confidential advice to Government, free and frank opinions , and legal professional privilege.
Some information has been withheld for the reasons of privacy of natural persons, confidential advice to Government, free and frank opinions, and legal professional privilege.
Some key findings included:
Some of the findings, distinctive to New Zealand are:
Some of the headline insights from the research are:
Some of the key insights we identified from the research as a whole are summarised in the sections below. Each section has drawn on a range of the commissioned research . Links are provided to the research reports for the main source /s at the end of each section . a. Bioeconomy opportuni ties, near term and future, are key for New Zealand’s shift from volume to value Our research identified emerging or future bioeconomy products/industries that could support the shift to lower emissions and a more productive economy . These use bioresources to their highest value, utilis e bio-waste streams, increase circularity in production, and/or reduc e emissions and dependency on fossil fuels. One of our research projects identified commercial opportunities for high -value, sustainable and low -emission use of bioresources . Thirty bioeconomy opportunities were identified, listed in Figure 1 below . In the short -term , the most attractive are complex products aimed at consumer markets in the categories of household and beauty (e g essential oils) , and health and nutrition ( eg nutraceuticals). In aggregate , added -value bioeconomy exports spanning processed foods, infant formula, nutraceuticals, alcoholic and non -alcoholic beverages, mānuka honey, and petfood were valued at $8.3 billion in 2023, up fro m $1.5 billion in 2003, a 20 -year compound annual growth (CAGR) rate of 9 per cent, above the CAGR required to double in ten years . Opportunities in biocosmetics, sports nutrition, and marine bio -actives were explored in depth . These are light weight, high -value, knowledge - intensive products aimed at high -growth international markets, and their development may include applications of biotechnology. Importantly, the more value that is created from existing resources through these kinds of product s, the more scope there is to achieve greater econom ic value while limiting or reducing resource depletion and environmental impacts. 3
Some of the most successful feature films made in recent years were filmed here, such as 'The Lord of the Rings trilogy', 'Avatar' and 'Mission Impossible 6'. Each year we are seeing growth in international production activity in New Zealand.
Some practitioners who work in family law are also members of the New Zealand Law Society (NZLS).
Some proposals consulted on that were not progressed
Some this is where we play circular economy and digital twin bingo. So when we've gone through the use case and some of the examples I wanted to highlight before you go into a workshop scenario, and this is this is designed to get your brain juices going. But on the left there on the slide, are the circular economy attributes, we've got all the things that a digital twin can facilitate. So we talked about the original design phase designing out, but maybe using different materials and being able to visualise what the impact would be if those are renewable or non-renewable.
Source: Deloitte Access Economics
Source: Digital technologies, digital twins and the circular and bioeconomy
Sources: Impacts of circular approaches on emissions, jobs, and other factors Barriers, enablers and approaches for a more circ ular economy Figure 2: High level material flows in the New Zealand economy, used to identify impacts of circular approaches (Sankey diagram) Data is mass in kt (thousand tonnes) for 2019 . Source : Impacts of circular approaches on emissions, j obs, and other factors , page 27.
South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty
Southern hemisphere space studies program
Southland District Council
Southland Murihiku Destination Strategy 2019-2029
Southland Murihiku Regional Workforce Plan 2023 Update
Southland just transition
Space Institute Director concerned over space debris
Space Policy Review: National Space Policy [PDF 153KB]
Space and Advanced Aviation Survey additional information [PDF, 997KB]
Space and advanced aviation are regulated under the Outer Space and High-altitude Activities Act and the Civil Aviation Act respectively. While traditional aviation is not within the scope of the Space and Advanced Aviation Strategy, the development and adoption of advanced aviation technologies supports the traditional aviation system.
Space and high-altitude sector development:
Space careers pathway webinar video
Space debris threatens the long-term usability of Earth orbit, posing risks to the delivery of satellite services that we rely upon in our daily lives. New Zealand aims to lead sustainable space access through our best-practice regulatory regime and through creating innovative and flexible policies to enable space activity that will improve the safety and sustainability of Earth orbit, such as our active debris removal policy. Enabling this innovative activity from New Zealand also presents an economic opportunity. We also support international efforts to reduce space debris generation, protect the long-term sustainability of space and preserve cultural and scientific uses of the night sky.
Space industry apprenticeships and internships
Space launches involving a US commercial launch vehicle: • Require insurance up to the level of the maximum probable loss (MPL) for damage arising from the launch activity . • Require New Zealand to be a co -beneficiary o n the MPL insurance policy. • Require the benefits of the US indemnity for damage above that amount to be passed on to New Zealand If you are seeking a facility or launch licence please get in touch with NZSA at: nzspaceagency@mbie.govt.nz
Space law, security and international relations
Space related research & development
Space resource utilisation and the Artemis Accords [PDF 1MB]
Space sector research, developments and technologies that are transforming the New Zealand and international space sector.
Space technologies can also be used to support sustainability on Earth. Building on our partnership with the Environmental Defence Fund on MethaneSAT, a satellite mission to monitor and study global methane emissions, the government will continue to explore ways in which we can use space-enabled services and data to understand and mitigate environmental challenges New Zealand is facing.
Space-related opportunities in New Zealand
Spark New Zealand Trading Ltd
Spark is the TSO provider of Local Residential Telephone Service to end users.
Spark operates the ICAP so emergency calls are first answered at a Spark call centre. Genuine emergency calls are then forwarded to the appropriate Emergency Service Provider (Police, Fire, Ambulance)..
Speaking to one of the National Contact Points for advice
Special feature: Beveridge curve in New Zealand
Specialising in telephone and video interpreting
Specialist deep-sea divers have this week started work off the Taranaki coast to kickstart the second phase of the decommissioning of the Tui Oil Field which is being overseen by the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE).
Specialist functions: Set MBIE-wide expectations, policies and procedures (Second Line)
Specific Code of Conduct requirements
Specific questions examined by the review include:
Specifically the changes include:
Specified pay deductions will not be able to be made for:
Sport and exercise programmes can include physiology, biomechanics, nutrition and cognitive science. Humans going to the Moon and Mars need these aspects in a very similar way to professional athletes. The AUT Sport Performance Research Institute New Zealand has an active research programme in collaboration with colleagues at NASA led by Dr Brian Russell.
Spotlight on rare disease research to benefit patients worldwide
Stable macroeconomic settings and sound fiscal policy are essential for economic growth.
Staff considerations for a dispute resolution scheme
Stage 1 - Initial determination
Stage 1: Review of seismic risk management in existing buildings
Stage 2 - Public consultation
Stage 2: Options to deliver the recommendations of the Review
Stage 3: Legislative process (if required) and implementation
Stage 4 - MBIE consideration of the report
Stage 6 - Cabinet and Order-in-Council
Stakeholder feedback will inform next steps following the consultati on. If Ministers wish to receive advice on more fundamental changes as a result of feedback, then more policy work will be required, including
Standard Public Holiday requirements under the Holidays Act will apply.
Standard Terms of Purchase (Terms) where another form of contract/agreement is not already in place.
Standards New Zealand website
Standards and conformance
Standards and conformance organisations in New Zealand
Standards and conformance regulatory system
Standards are published documents that set out agreed specifications for products, processes, performance or services. Standards can cover safety, compatibility, performance, information and quality.
Start your application via the MBIE jobs portal
Starting your screen share session
Startup Advisors Council Meeting Minutes 7 December 2022
Startup Advisors Council Meeting Minutes August 8 2022
Startup Advisors Council Meeting Minutes February 13 2023
Startup Advisors Council Meeting Minutes June 27 2022
Startup Advisors Council Meeting Minutes October 14 2022
Startup Advisors Council appointed
Startups are innovative companies, often in the tech industry, with a scalable business model and strong potential to grow quickly and expand globally. They are important because the products and services they develop can lead to positive economic development outcomes, address pressing issues like climate change and health challenges, and unlock new business models.
State Services Commission Inquiry into the use of external security consultants
State of the Building and Construction Sector
Statement of Economic Policy to the Commerce Commission
Statement of Intent 2014 to 2018
Statement of Intent 2015 to 2019
Statement of Intent 2018 to 2022
Statement of National Education and Learning priorities Tertiary Education Strategy
Statement on te Tiriti o Waitangi
Statements of responsibility
Statistics House investigation
Statistics NZ data on the screen industry show that in 2017:
Statistics New Zealand 2016/2017 data on the screen industry
Statistics New Zealand conducts a business survey that includes statistics about business growth and innovation. You can find details about commitment and barriers to innovation, use of information and communications technology, turnover and profitability, management practices and behaviours, and financing arrangements.
Statistics New Zealand conducts a survey of research and development (R&D). You can find out about the R&D workforce, funding, research activity, and information about how businesses work with universities and Crown research institutes. This survey enables comparisons between countries because it is based on the international Frascati Manual.
Stats NZ 2015 review of tourism data
Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High -altitude Activities Act 2017 A statutory review of the Act, pursuant to section 86
Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High-Altitude Activities Act 2017
Statutory Review of the Outer Space and High-Altitude Activities Act 2017 [PDF 820KB]
Step 1: When the Employment Relations Authority or Employment Court is deciding whether to establish a personal grievance:
Step 2: Enter the code that was provided by the Client Services Advisor over the phone or sent via email on the next webpage that opens.
Step 2: When the Employment Relations Authority or Employment Court is deciding whether to award remedies:
Step 3: Select the button below the field to submit.
Step 3: When the Employment Relations Authority or Employment Court are deciding whether to reduce remedies:
Step 4: Follow the prompts and guidance from your Client Service Advisor to download and install the programme.
Steve Hurring (March to October 2019)
Steve has been the Mayor of Rotorua since 2013, and was elected to the Rotorua District Council in 1996.
Steve is the co-Chair of the Responsible Camping Working Group. She is a trained midwife and has held a number of roles in the Health sector, including as union representative for the New Zealand Nurses Association.
Steven McCabe, one of the four NASA interns on the inaugural New Zealand Space Scholarship talks about his 10-week project designing small sensors to explore hard-to-reach areas on Mars and the Moon. He also shows us some of the other amazing research happening at the NASA Ames Research Centre in California.
Strategic Baseline review
Strategic Business Plan 2024-2025
Strategic Intentions / Statement of Intent
Strategic Intentions 2021 to 2025
Strategic Intentions 2023 to 2028
Strategic Science Investment Fund
Strategic Science Investment Fund Programmes - Platform Investment Contract Template 2024
Strategic Tourism Assets Protection
Strategic Tourism Assets Protection Programme
Strategic Tourism Assets Protection Programme (STAPP)
Strategic Tourism Assets Protection Programme funding recipients
Strategic intentions 2023-2028
Strategy and Performance is headed by Deputy Secretary Melanie Porter.
Strategy to support the growth of our space and advanced aviation sectors
Strategy, Performance and Design
Strategy, Planning and Performance.
Strengthen operational, policy and legislative settings to enhance enforcement and align with international obligations
Strengthened fuel reserves to help support economic stability
Strengthening consideration and accountability for the employee's behaviour in the personal grievance process [PDF 167KB]
Strengthening enforcement of Employment Standards
Strengthening enforcement of employment standards
Strengthening enforcement of employment standards regulatory impact statement
Strengthening entry and ongoing participation requirements for AEs by:
Strengthening requirements for operators to communicate risks to activity participants
Strengthening the assessment of claims and injury management processes
Stronger operator registration and notification requirements
Structural Geology and Tectonics (GEOL701)
Structural performance of Christchurch CBD building in the 22 February 2011 aftershock
Structural performance of commercial buildings
Structure and Spectroscopy (CHEM115)
Students must be pursuing a relevant graduate degree at the time of the internship. Students not currently undertaking graduate studies are eligible to apply only if they will be undertaking graduate studies at the time of the internship and must submit proof of enrolment as part of their application.
Study astronomy, physics, chemistry, molecular biology, microbiology, ecology, planetary science, geography and geology and then astrobiology at University of Auckland.
Study environmental sciences, climatology, agriculture, GIS
Study geology and planetary sciences
Study law, international relations, intelligence, security:
Study medicine, biomedical science, health science, molecular biology, cell biology, life sciences, pathology, anatomy and physiology, genetics, radiobiology, medical laboratory science.
Study on remanufacturing and other VRPs in Canada
Sub-sector (for example, cruise) consumer data (for example, volumes, spend, behaviours, characteristics)
Submissions are due 28 March 2022, 5pm.
Submissions closed on 11 March 2016. We received 23 submissions in response to the discussion document. The majority of the feedback received was that stakeholders don't want specialist tribunals and would prefer a consistent process of appeal through the courts. As a result, it was decided not to progress work on establishing specialist appeal tribunal.
Submissions closed on the 2018 review on 13 December 2019.
Submissions due: 13 June 2025, 5pm
Submissions may be made to the trade labour email address above or the following postal address:
Submissions on this discussion document closed on 10 December 2024 and we are currently working through next steps.
Submissions/nominations have now closed.
Submit a report through our workplace Integrity Line here:
Submit your completed application form to
Submit your feedback on how effective the current system is for managing seismic risk.
Subscribe for updates on the reform process and progress
Subscribe to New Zealand Petroleum and Minerals Updates
Subscribe to data updates
Subscribe to energy data alerts
Subscribe to information release notifications
Subscribe to receive information and updates from New Zealand Petroleum and Minerals (NZP&M).
Subscribe to receive updates about Language Assistance Services
Subscribe to sector alerts
Subscribe to the Energy Use Newsletter
Subscribe to tourism data alerts
Subscribe to tourism sector alerts
Subsector (for example, cruise) consumer data (for example, waste, biodiversity, carbon footprints (kilometres travelled).
Success in STEM subjects provides better options for study and employment in most space careers. STEM subjects form the basis for many careers that require innovation and problem-solving skills. Studying STEM encourages you to experiment and learn from real life experiences.
Successful 2018 proposals
Successful Horizon Europe Pillar 2 projects with New Zealand partners
Successful applicants will be awarded the New Zealand Space Scholarship to support the costs of their internship. Up to 7 scholarships are available for 2025.
Successful applicants will enter into an investment contract and associated work programme agreement with us (subject to any pre-contractual conditions being met).
Successful applicants will travel to the USA for a 3-month internship where they will work on innovative and complex projects under the supervision of a NASA mentor. Internships at NASA are an intensive experience and require a high level of professionalism, enthusiasm, and self-management.
Successful candidates will need to comply with certain obligations including, but not limited to, the following:
Successful destinations are characterised by a high degree of alignment between national, regional and local planning frameworks including visions and goals.
Successful destinations have strong leaders and champions, fit for purpose organisational structures, and collaborative partnerships and coordinated delivery across all aspects of the destination. In the New Zealand context, this is particularly important in partnerships between the Crown and iwi.
Successful destinations regularly revise and re-engineer their plans and structures according to the changing visitor needs and economic influences.
Successful funding application ANZSRC data
Sue Suckling, Independent Director and Strategy Consultant
Sue holds a Master of Biotechnology from Massey University, and an Honorary Doctorate from Lincoln University, recognising her contribution to business and science.
Summaries of public submissions on NZ Post proposals [XLSX 249KB]
Summary Proceedings Act 1957
Summary and assessment of future state options
Summary of Building Regulatory System Assessment
Summary of Competition Regulatory System Assessment
Summary of Corporate Regulatory System Assessment
Summary of Government actions
Summary of Preferred Option or Conclusion (if no preferred option) How will the agency’s preferred approach work to bring about the desired change? Why is this the preferred option? Why is it feasible? Is the preferred approach likely to be reflected in the Cabinet paper? The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) recommends: 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:06:16
Summary of approved payloads
Summary of changes to the adventure activities regulatory regime
Summary of consultation on the draft Long-term Insights Briefing: The future of Business for Aotearoa New Zealand
Summary of consultation on the draft Longterm Insights Briefing: The future of Business for Aotearoa New Zealand
Summary of discussion document for public consultation on proposed fees and levies, and their amounts, administered by the New Zealand Companies Office.
Summary of feedback from Phase 1
Summary of feedback from Terms of Reference public consultation
Summary of feedback on the Exposure draft
Summary of findings - Whakaari White Island WorkSafe report [PDF 156KB]
Summary of goals and actions
Summary of key survey findings 2017
Summary of proposed changes: Review of New Zealand Companies Office Fees and Levies (2025)
Summary of proposed changes: Review of New Zealand Companies Office fees and levies (2025)
Summary of questions for the consultation on the future of the skilled migrant category
Summary of submissions for each proposal
Summary of submissions: Developing a regulatory framework for offshore renewable energy
Summary of submissions: Proposed changes to the International Visitor Conservation and Tourism Levy
Summary of the Immigration (Fiscal Sustainability and System Integrity) Amendment Bill changes to the Immigration Act 2009 to improve fiscal sustainability and the integrity of the immigration system.
Summary of the feedback provided on the TDLG report
Summary of the memorandum of understanding between New Zealand and Amazon.
Summary of the proposed changes
Summary of the proposed response to the Independent Review, addressing the individual recommendations and setting out next steps
Summary report on analyses of written submissions and consultation meetings [PDF 188KB]
Summary results from the 2021 and 2022 Migrant Surveys
Summary slides - Barriers, Enablers, and Approaches for a more Circular Economy
Summary slides to accompany the Barriers, Enablers, and Approaches for a more Circular Economy report.
Summary: Changes to the Credit Contracts and Consumer Finance Regulations 2004 and Responsible Lending Code following the 2022 review
Summary: Findings from the review of the December 2021 credit law changes
Summary: Problem and Proposed Approach Problem Definition What problem or opportunity does this proposal seek to address? Why is Government intervention required? The Holidays Act 2003 (the Act) sets out the minimum entitlements to holidays and leave, and payment for them, that employers are obliged to provide to their employees. Its purpose is to promote balance between work and other aspects of employees’ lives by providing minimum entitlements to annual ho lidays, public holidays, and sick, bereavement and family violence leave. A number of issues have been identified with the Act that make it difficult to implement in practice. Chief among these is that there is often a lack of prescription, particularly in how entitlements should be provided and how they are to be paid. For example, the Act does not prescribe how to determine what a ‘week’ is for the purposes of annual holidays or an ‘otherwise working day’ for other forms of leave, and is silent on how to include some types of payments, such as bonuses, in payment calculations. The result is that current provisions generally work for a standard five day, 40 hour week, but pose a number of issues when applied to more diverse working arrangements and variable pay structures. To help address these concerns , Cabinet agreed in May 2018 to establish a Taskforce to review the legislation and suggest recommendations for change. The tripartite group, comprised of government, union and business representatives, provided the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety with its final report in October 2019. The proposed approach is an improved status quo, where the existing units of entitlement are retained (weeks for annual holidays, days for other forms of leave) and the focus is on addressing known issues with the existing Act. An alternative approach is to introduce an hours -based accrual sy stem for annual holidays, with other aspects following the Taskforce’s proposals. Without legislative intervention, many of the issues with the Act will persist.
Summary: Use this template to understand the terms and conditions if you are successful with your proposal for the 2025 funding round
Supplier has sufficient resources to deliver. Realistic delivery timelines are proposed taking into account other commitments, and data delivery requirements to MBIE.
Supply chain emissions are significant across all subsectors.
Support 4,000 additional young jobseekers in phone-based case management including by providing individual job plans.
Support Workers (Pay Equity) Settlements Act 2017
Support an efficient and effective review process.
Support for Energy Education in Communities Programme
Support for innovation and R&D
Support for loss-making firms and transition arrangements for Growth Grant recipients R&D Tax Incentive Briefing [PDF 123KB]
Support people to have the skills they need to succeed in work, increasing earning potential and reducing benefit in-flows and encouraging continued upskilling in-work for improved productivity and resilience.
Support the development of fruit and vegetables that are more resilient to pests and diseases. This would mean more food ends up on the table, and less in the bin.
Support thriving industries and regions so businesses can create more jobs and people can work where they choose
Support thriving industries and regions so businesses can create more jobs and people can work where they choose.
Support through Qualmark:
Support through the Regional Business Partners network:
Support to all employees to carry out their obligations under this policy is made available in a Child Protection Procedure. Each MBIE business function that is or becomes a provider of children's services has additional supporting standard operating procedures (SOPs) and guidelines as required to meet Child Protection requirements under the relevant legislation.
Support will be available for people to find work and connect them with training or rehabilitation programmes
Support workplaces to respond to the changing world of work and to provide healthy, safe and productive jobs with opportunities for workers to progress
Support workplaces to respond to the changing world of work and to provide healthy, safe and productive jobs with opportunities for workers to progress.
Supporting Government priorities
Supporting a skilled and productive workforce
Supporting communities to manage tourism
Supporting sustainable freedom camping in Aotearoa New Zealand
Supporting the development of iwi-led research and development strategies.
Supporting the integrity of the corporate governance system
Survey evaluating the level of customer service provided by Immigration NZ branches worldwide.
Survey of Seismic Restraint of Non-Structural Elements in Existing Commercial Buildings
Suse is the current Chair of the Angel Association New Zealand, as well as one of the founders of Angel HQ (Wellington's angel investor network). Suse has experience in early-stage finance and is knowledgeable about key sectors. She is also skilled in building capability among founders and engaging at the regional level.
Sustainability sits at the heart of DM and enables benefits to be realised while managing the impacts of tourism.
Sustainability: increase the resilience or environmental sustainability of tourism.
Sustainable and resilient economy transformation
Sustainable packaging targets in Australia
Suzanne Stew is Deputy Secretary for Te Whakatairanga Service Delivery Group, which provides critical functions and services that support businesses, employees and consumers to operate successfully in the market place.
Suzanne Stew, Deputy Secretary, Te Whakatairanga Service Delivery
Suzanne is married to Simon and mum to Harry and given any opportunity will join in any singing or dancing.
Suzanne is originally from the UK and worked for British Telecom and Sony before moving to New Zealand in 2001. She began her career as a product engineer and holds a Bachelor of Engineering (Hons) Electronic and Microprocessor Engineering from Strathclyde University in Glasgow, and an MBA from Imperial College in London.
Suzanne joined the public service in 2011 as General Manager Internal Partners at New Zealand Trade and Enterprise, where she led the delivery of corporate support services. Prior to that, she held senior management roles spanning diverse functions at TelstraClear and Wrightson.
System governance resources at a glance
T his briefing provides a summary of the changes proposed, with more detailed advice and
THEME SUB -THEME SUBMITTER SUBMITTE R COMMENT ANALYSIS LOCATION OF FUNCTIONS Integration of the payload office with the radio frequency licensing office Care Weather Care Weather noted that they went through New Zealand’s licensing process as part of a Rocket Lab launch in March 2021. Their feedback was that it may be helpful to integrate the payload office with the radio frequency licensing office in New Zealand. Car e Weather considered several jurisdictions for radio frequency licensing and indicated that doing both radio frequency and payload licensing (as well as Earth observation licensing if not already integrated) in the same office may have been appealing to th em as it would have reduced the number of agencies they have to work with. Care Weather’s submission suggested that there may be merit in considering New Zealand’s radio frequency licensing strategy in light of the international radio frequency licensing options to see whether an integrated licensing office may attract more applicants to our regime. This matter is beyond the scope of the Review but is referred to MBIE for its consideration.
TNZ is also doing work to keep the New Zealand brand alive internationally to ensure New Zealand is top of mind for international travellers when borders re-open.
TO: Insert MBIE Business Group Att: Insert name of client contact MBIE LEGAL SERVICES , WELLINGTON Att: Manager Legal Services - Litigation Title: Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines Date of Issue: July 2018 Security Classification Unclassified Version: 1.1 Review ed June 2024 Approved By: Chief Legal Officer Owner: Chief Legal Officer Page 16 of 16 FROM: Insert name of prosecutor and firm
TSOs that cease to apply under the Telecommunications (New Regulatory Framework) Amendment Act 2018
Table 2 1: Proposed fees for specific Friendly Societies register services and rounding $ (excluding GST) Friendly Societies register Unit Cost Proposed fee Current fee Change in fee % change For filing, under section 82(3) of the Act, a copy of a special resolution passed for the purpose of amalgamation or transfer of engagements or conversion into a company. 133.33 135.00 133.33 1.67 1% For filing a resolution for conversion of a society into a branch under section 88 of the Act . 177.78 175.00 177.78 (2.78 ) (2%) For any cancellation or suspension of the registration of a society or branch under any of paragraphs (d) to (g) of section 92(1) of the Act . 133.33 135.00 133.33 1.67 1% For filing an instrument of dissolution under section 94 of the Act. 311.11 310.00 311.11 (1.11 ) (0.4%) Fees to be revoked The Friendly Societies and Credit Unions (Fees) Regulations 1992 currently prescribe fees for services that are no longer delivered by the Companies Office . Updates are also required to the description of some fees in the Regulations following a change to the Act in 2019 . Table 22 on the next page shows the fees proposed to be revoked or to have their description updated in those regulations.
Table 4: Impact of the Taskforce’s proposals on the annual holidays payment model Annual holidays payments – Option One Percentage of employees from testing dataset affected Worse off (compared to status quo) 10.35% Worse by more than 15% 3.33% Worse by 5 - 15% 3.45% Worse by 0 - 5% 3.57% No change 55.16% Better off (compared to status quo) 34.48% Better by 0-5% 27.59% Better by 5- 15% 6.90% Better by more than 15% 0.00% Average impact on employees from the testing dataset ($) Average payment for four weeks’ leave (under proposed option) $5,691.29 (compared to $5,673.22 under the status quo) Average % variance per employee + 0.32% Average $ variance per employee + $18.07
Tackling sector challenges
Tagalog: Suporta sa wika kapag tumatawag sa mga serbisyo ng pamahalaan
Taiao Ora Consultants Limited
Taiepa Tiketike: Passive Resistance to Climate Change at Parihaka is a project which recently received Gold Status for its partnered approach to research into sustainable energy opportunities for the community of Parihaka.
Tait will carry out experiments using facilities at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory not currently available in New Zealand. Titan is considered ideal for studying the kinds of chemical interactions that occurred before life developed on Earth.
Taitokerau Fibre Networks Ltd
Taking a whole-of-system view involves thinking about how all the regulatory functions within a system are working together as a whole to deliver the best possible outcomes. Common regulatory functions include:
Taking responsibility to commit to doing things right
Taking the time to put in place and run good governance is an example of putting regulatory stewardship into practice.
Takurua (Tak) Mutu, Co-Owner and Director of MDA Group
Talk to us about the match between applied academia and industry and what this means for both.
Tanya Baker, Medicines NZ
Taranaki Regional Workforce Plan 2022
Taranaki Regional Workforce Plan Refresh 2023
Target MSD case management to specific cohorts to support the Jobseeker target.
Targeted consultation on a draft Bill
Targeted review of adventure activities
Targeted review of adventure activity regulations [PDF 434KB]
Targeted review of the Commerce Act 2015
Targeted review of the adventure activities regulatory regime [PDF 1.5MB]
Targeted review of the adventure activities regulatory regime: stakeholder engagement [PDF 270KB]
Taskforce’s recommendations
Taxation (KiwiSaver, Student Loans, and Remedial Matters) Bill
Te Ara Amiorangi: Our path, Our direction
Te Ara Paerangi statement: Embedding Te Tiriti o Waitangi
Te Hiringa Mahara/Mental Health and Wellbeing Commission
Te Kaunihera Rata o Aotearoa
Te Kawa Mataaho - Public Service Commission
Te Kawa Mataaho Public Service Commission
Te Kawa Mataaho Public Service Commission have established six principles for flexible working:
Te Kawa Mataaho The Public Service Commission
Te Kawa Mataaho, Public Service Commission publish data covering the release of official information by different agencies every 6 months.
Te Kupeka Umaka ki Araiteuru (KUMA)
Te Manu Atatu Incorporated
Te Pu-a-nga Maara Charitable Trust
Te Purunga ki Te Raki Regional Workforce Plan
Te Tai o Poutini West Coast
Te Tari o Te Pirimia Me Te Komiti Matua
Te Waihanga/NZ Infrastructure Commission
Te Whakatairanga Service Delivery
Te Whakatairanga Service Delivery is headed by Deputy Secretary Suzanne Stew.
Te kaupapa outcomes framework
Te whakahaumaru i te matatapu o te tangata.
Te whakaute i te tangata ake.
Technical 3-year review of OSHAA
Technical Advisory Group members
Technical capability • For key person s relied upon for their technical capability in operating a safe launch facility: o The person’s name o The relationship of the person to the applicant (e.g. emp loyee, contractor, employee of related company etc) o Evidence of the person’s qualifications and experience to conduct launch facility operations and activities and any other information the person considers relevant to the assessment of 25
Technical capability • For key persons relied upon for their technical capability in conducting a safe laun ch: o The person’s name o The relationship of the person to the applicant (e.g. employee, contractor, employee of related company etc) o Evidence of the person’s qualifications and experience to conduct launch activities • Any other information the person consid ers relevant to the assessment of technical capability
Technical investigation into the structural performance of buildings in Christchurch
Technologies of special interest profiling
Technologies that could have military or security applications
Technology & Architecture.
Technology Safeguards Agreement (TSA) and Side arrangement to the TSA
Technology and Innovation
Technology: lift productivity or capability of the tourism sector through technology-based solutions.
Telecom Deed of Indemnity
Telecom RBI agreement, Schedule 2, Appendix A: RBI CBDP Fixed Line
Telecom RBI agreement, Schedule 2, Appendix A: RBI Rural Connections
Telecom RBI agreement, Schedule 2, Appendix A: RPOPs and LBAPs
Telecom has also submitted a draft deed of undertaking for open access on its legacy fixed copper network, in accordance with section 41 of the Telecommunications Act 2001.
Telecom proposed a variation to the operational separation undertakings to clarify how certain rural telecommunications services would be treated under non-discrimination rules under the RBI contract with the Government.
Telecom/Chorus Copper Deed
Telecom/Chorus Fibre Deed
Telecom/Chorus Rural Broadband Initiative Deed
Telecommunications (Interception Capability and Security) Act 2013
Telecommunications (Regulated Fibre Services) Regulations 2021
Telecommunications Act 2001
Telecommunications Act and its associated regulations which together comprise the New Zealand telecommunications regulatory regime. The Telecommunications Act 2001 regulates the supply of some telecommunication services for promoting competition in telecommunication markets to bring long-term benefits to its users in New Zealand.
Telecommunications Development Levy
Telecommunications Disputes
Telecommunications Relay Service
Telecommunications Service Obligations (TSO) deed for local residential telephone services
Telecommunications and broadcasting network operators
Telecommunications and broadcasting network operators in New Zealand by month of registration.
Telecommunications service obligations
Telephone and Video Interpreting Services Panel providers
Telephone and video interpreting service
Telephone and video interpreting service for government agencies.
Telephone/Video Interpreting
Telephone/Video Interpreting Service
Teletypewriter (TTY) to voice
Temporality or time sequence
Temporary Accommodation Service
Temporary Migrant Worker Exploitation review
Temporary entry class visa holder charges
Temporary migrant worker exploitation review: Release of consultation document - Minute of Decision [PDF 297KB]
Temporary migrants, who breach their visa conditions by working in the New Zealand sex industry, are vulnerable to exploitation.
Temporary worker numbers continued to grow
Temporary workers from the Pacific continue to grow, driven by the continuous increase in workers under the Recognised Seasonal Employer Scheme
Temporary workers help fill seasonal or short-term skills shortages. In the 2016/17 year, 15,173 people from the Pacific were approved for a temporary work visa. The number of Pacific temporary work visa approvals has been growing, increasing by 20% over the last 5 years.
Term Definit ion Prosecution a proceeding in (a) the District or High Court under the Criminal Procedure Act 2011 in respect of an offence; (b) the Employment Court under the Employment Relations Act 2000 in respect of an offence under that Act. prosecution decision the decision to prosecute, not to prosecute, to withdraw charges or to otherwise continue/discontinue criminal proceedings once commenced . Title: Prosecution Policy Date of Issue: July 2018 Dep Sec Sponsor: [Insert Deputy Secretary Title] Version: 1.1 Last Review: February 2024 Policy Owner: Chief Legal Officer Policy Classification : Operation al Next Review : February 2027 Security Classification: Unclassified Page 3 of 6 prosecution decision maker manager within an MBIE business unit who has the authority under delegation and the Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines to make a prosecution decision. prosecutor MBIE in -house prosecutors, Crown solicitors, or other solicitors or barristers instructed by MBIE as a prosecutor in accordance with the Cabinet Directions on the Conduct of Core Crown Legal Business and Crown Solicitor guidance. For the purposes of issues relating to disclosure, prosecutor has an alternative meaning. With disclosure, the functions of the prosecutor are shared between the investigator and the lawyer responsible for the file. 6 Policy statements 6.1 Prosecution action is one of a number of possible responses that may be used by MBIE in respect of criminal conduct within the areas that it regulates . It is a significant enforcement tool that must be used in a deliberate and targeted manner . 6.2 MBIE’s decisions to prosecute, and whether or not to continue with prosecutions, must be made fairly and consistently. Each prosecution decision must take into account the factors set out in the Solicitor -General’s Prosecution Guidelines (including the facts of each case, the relevant legislation, the evidence and the public interest) and any specific internal enforcement strategies. Guidance on decision making is set out in the Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines . Each prosecution decision must be taken independently by a staff member who is free from conflicts of interest. 6.3 Prosecution decision makers must consider each case on its own merits when making the decision to prosecute. 6.4 Each prosecution recommendation must be reviewed by a prosecutor to ensure that the Tests for Prosecution (evidential sufficiency and public interest) set out in the Solicitor -General’s Prosecution Guidelines are met. 6.5 When making a prosecution decision , decision makers must follow Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines . 6.6 All prosecution decisions must be recorded as set out in the Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines . 6.7 Managers are required to report any breaches of the policy, any adverse comments by courts, and any costs awarded against MBIE in MBIE prosecutions to the Chief Legal Officer . 7 Key accountabilities and responsibilities Role Responsibility Governance and oversight Secretary for Business Innovation and Employment & Chief Executive (The Secretary) • Has overall responsibility for ensuring MBIE meets its obligations under the Prosecution Policy Assurance Risk and Accountability Committee ( ARA ) • Maintains overall oversight of the status of the Prosecution Policy • Approves new and major amendments to this policy Title: Prosecution Policy Date of Issue: July 2018 Dep Sec Sponsor: [Insert Deputy Secretary Title] Version: 1.1 Last Review: February 2024 Policy Owner: Chief Legal Officer Policy Classification : Operation al Next Review : February 2027 Security Classification: Unclassified Page 4 of 6 Business group management: Identify and manage risks in day -to-day operations (1st Line) Deputy Secretaries (Dep Secs) • Embedding this policy in their business groups. • Ensuring their business groups are compliant with this policy and associated procedure Managers and People Leaders • Making employees aware of this policy and the procedure and guidelines that support compliance with it • Ensuring employees are given appropriate information and training to assist them to comply with their obligations under this policy • Having systems in place to enable timely and effective monitoring and auditing of prosecution decision -making (including relating to infringements) • Reporting on prosecutions outcomes in accordance with the Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines • Responsible for embedding the policy into operational activities within their business area • Ensure new and existing staff in their teams are made aware of and comply with the policy • Reviewing prosecution files and making prosecution decisions in accordance with the Solicitor -General’s Prosecution Guidelines , • this Policy, and the Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines Our People • Comply with this policy and associated procedure applicable to their role Prosecutors • Reviewing prosecution files and recommendations • Advising on whether tests for prosecution in the Solicitor -General’s Prosecution Guidelines , are met • Conducting prosecutions Specialist functions: Set MBIE -wide expectations, policies and procedures (2nd Line) Chief Legal Officer (Policy Owner) • Has overall responsibility for the system for the management of MBIE’s legal risk, and the provision and procurement of legal services • Provides advice and support to business groups relating to the provision and procurement of legal services in accordance with the Legal Services Policy Title: Prosecution Policy Date of Issue: July 2018 Dep Sec Sponsor: [Insert Deputy Secretary Title] Version: 1.1 Last Review: February 2024 Policy Owner: Chief Legal Officer Policy Classification : Operation al Next Review : February 2027 Security Classification: Unclassified Page 5 of 6 Manager Legal Services (Litigation) • Assists business groups with any breach management / mitigation activities as required • Monitors compliance with the policy on a regular basis • Ensures the policy is reviewed and updated by the agreed review date • Provides quarterly reporting on policy compli ance to the Compliance Centre of Excellence • Establishes and maintains the Litigation Register 8 Procedures a. Prosec ution Procedure and Guidelines 9 Related MBIE policies and documents a. Declarations of Interest policy b. Legal services policy c. News M edia policy
Terms of Reference for review of operationalising of non-interference provisions under the Crown Minerals Act [PDF 452KB]
Terms of Reference for the review of seismic risk management in existing buildings [PDF 220KB]
Terms of reference for New Zealand Tourism Futures Taskforce
Terms of reference for a review of electricity market performance
Terms of reference for the Fair Pay Agreement Working Group [PDF 159KB]
Terms of reference for the Science System Advisory Group.
Terms of use for social media accounts
Territorial authorities must consult their communities using the special consultative procedure on any local policy to allow shop trading on Easter Sunday.
Tertiary Education Commission
Text description of image
Text description of infographic
That is a very brief overview of the first document but obviously there is an incredible amount of detail in that document. We will now move on to the Thirty Opportunities document, so in the screening process we had to go from 100 to 30. What happens in this document is all of the 30 opportunities are developed in more detail. We are going to go through one of those in detail.
That was just a brief run through of the essential oils Stage II level.
That wraps up the presentation and where we are. We have gone through a lot of material, as I said 1300 pages of material is there and this is just acting as a teaser, and I hope it encourages you to dive into the documents that interest you. Some audiences may be interested in some documents and audiences may be interested in others. Thank you for taking the time to listen to us and if you have got any questions or observations, complaints or comments please contact us, we always love to talk about our work. Thank you.
The $12 million of funding to foodbanks and community food organisations was allocated through the Ministry of Social Development Food Secure Communities Programme.
The $200 million Tourism Communities: Support, Recovery and Re-set Plan includes:
The 'Other' ethnicity category incorporates the following ethnicities and sub-categories: 'Other European', 'Asian', 'Southeast Asian', 'Indian', 'Other Asian', 'Middle Eastern', 'Latin American', 'African' 'Other Ethnicity' and when an individual did not know what their ethnicity was
The 'Pasifika' ethnicity category incorporates the following ethnicities and sub-categories: 'Fijian', 'Cook Islands Maori', 'Tongan', 'Samoan', ''Niuean', 'Tokelauan' 'Pacific Peoples' and 'Other Pacific Peoples'
The 10-year Strategy highlights the importance of destination management and presents a positive vision for the future where Southland.
The 111 Contact Code allows people to contact the 111 emergency service in the event of a power failure.
The 13-month review is complete and the Government has given its response. It investigated whether the current electricity market delivered a fair and equitable price to consumers. It also considered improvements to future-proof the sector and its governance structures.
The 2 Regulatory Impact Statements that inform the development of amendments to the Ultra-Fast Broadband Initiative model:
The 2007 Tourism Flows Model aimed to help stakeholders understand the impact of tourism growth on publicly provided infrastructure.
The 2016 Regional Migration Trend reports below provide an overview of the migrant population and migration trends in each region of New Zealand. The reports show trends to 2015/16 and compare recent immigration patterns with previous years.
The 2016 Research, Science and Innovation Domain Plan (the Domain Plan) proposed solving this problem by creating a national research information system as a single online hub of consistent, standardised, and accurate information about the sector.
The 2016 minimum wage was $15.25 per hour.
The 2017 minimum wage was $15.75 per hour.
The 2018 minimum wage was $16.50 per hour.
The 2018 release of our experimental Modelled Territorial Authority Gross Domestic Product (MTAGDP) estimates is for the year ended March 2017.
The 2019 minimum wage was $17.70 per hour.
The 2019 release of our experimental Modelled Territorial Authority Gross Domestic Product (MTAGDP) estimates is for the year ended March 2018.
The 2020 Cabinet decision would add complexity to the framework for providing AL by creating three separate concepts related to AL , (AL entitlement that has arisen, pro rata AL in advance and AL in advance of pro-rata AL in advance) with different rules that apply to each .
The 2020 minimum wage was $18.90 per hour.
The 2020 release of our experimental Modelled Territorial Authority Gross Domestic Product (MTAGDP) estimates is for the year ended March 2019.
The 2021 minimum wage was $20 per hour.
The 2021 release of our experimental Modelled Territorial Authority Gross Domestic Product (MTAGDP) estimates is for the year ended March 2020.
The 2022 minimum wage was $21.20 per hour.
The 2023 Auckland Anniversary Weekend floods and Cyclone Gabrielle marked the first instance where the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) deployed RBAs at a national level. Over 240 local and MBIE-deployed RBAs were dispatched across the North Island, completing over 10,000 rapid building assessments. Territorial authorities also deployed RBAs to their communities.
The 2023 minimum wage was $22.70 per hour.
The 2023 theme: Inclusive science, technology and innovation for a resilient and sustainable environment
The 2024 minimum wage is $23.15 per hour.
The 2025 minimum wage will be $23.50 per hour from 1 April 2025.
The 3 business initiatives
The 30 that were identified and emerged as the high scoring products from Stage I into Stage II, the ones we showed on the page prior but here they are. There is a range of forestry-based products, a range of water-based products, land-based products, wood, health and beauty, household, beverages, construction etc and in many ways this is a government project and everyone when home with a prize. There is a good range of products here, there is a good range of platforms here, and all of these have opportunities for the future for New Zealand.
The 4 government agencies that developed the briefing, including by holding 2 rounds of consultation, are the:
The AERU modelling had limited ability to incorporate off-setting actions (such as integrating forestry more fully into farming operations), or how improvements in livestock and land use productivity would affect the scenario outcomes.
The ANZSRC Review Outcomes Paper details the review process and outcomes including a summary of changes. Note: Section 5 of the Outcomes Paper has been revised, and additional detail has been added for clarity.
The APEC Science Prize for Innovation, Research and Education (ASPIRE) is an annual award which recognises young scientists who have demonstrated a commitment to both excellence in scientific research, as evidenced by scholarly publication, and cooperation with scientists from other APEC member economies.
The Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC)
The Accident Compensation Corporation manages and delivers a comprehensive, non-fault personal injury cover scheme for all New Zealand residents and visitors to New Zealand. The scheme supports injured people to return to work, independence or everyday life as quickly and safely as possible.
The Accommodation Data Programme (ADP) is a 'by industry for industry' research programme providing information about short-term accommodation activity at national, regional, and council levels. It estimates the guest nights, occupancy rates and other measures relating to the accommodation industry.
The Accreditation Council is a user-funded, autonomous Crown entity established as the national body for accreditation of testing and inspection bodies. Its activities contribute to the safeguarding of the health and well-being of New Zealanders and ensuring our products and services meet domestic and overseas regulatory and customer requirements.
The Act came into force on 1 April 2016. The main changes to employment law it introduced included:
The Act describes when licences and permits are required, how they are issued, and what conditions they may include. It explains the purposes of regulation in this area, including facilitating the development of a space sector, ensuring safe and secure operations, implementing international obligations, managing liability, and preserving national security and national interests.
The Act does not allow a licence/permit holder to surrender a licence. Space, Policy and Regulatory Team (MBIE) Currently the only way a licence/permit holder can ‘give up’ their licence is to write to the Minister and request the Minister revoke it. This creates an administrative burden and may potentially change reportable figures ( eg if a licence is revoked, they have to report it on future applications etc.). Providing the legislative mechanism to surrender a permit or licence w ould help to alleviate some of these issues ( eg MBIE would no longer need to consult with the Minister and seek his revocation of a licence or permit, thereby reducing the compliance burden), and provide a quicker (and potentially more certain) route to achieving the same outcome for the applicant ( ie that they no longer hold the permit or licence). The Review recommends that the Act be amended to provide those licences and permits issued under the OSHAA can be surrendered by their holder, subject to the condition that p ayload permit holders may only surrender their licence if the payload has not been launched . The law should be clear that it cannot be used as a mechanism to avoid or in any way alter responsibilities for the payload when in orbit. Review the criteria for the ‘fit and proper person’ test under OSHAA . The ‘fit and proper person’ test (OSHAA Section 52 ) at 1(d) allows the Minister to take into account any history of ‘mental health problems, or serious behavioural problems.’ Space, Policy and Regulatory Team (MBIE) The Review team notes that mental health and behavioural issues are commonly regarded as factors in assessing whether a person is a fit and proper person to carry out a potentially dangerous activity. The review team also notes that there is an issue about what needs to be taken into account when assessing regulatory compliance. For instance, there is a question of whether it should only appl y to non -compliance with regulatory requirements relating to space and high -altitude activities, or whether it should extend to non -compliance with any law, such as tax law or employment laws . The Review recommends that fit and proper person test (in sect ion 52 of the Act) be reviewed to consider: • Whether it is still fit for purpose, with particular regard for whether the provisions relating to a person’s mental health history are appropriate; and • Whether compliance with other legislation or regulatory regimes should also be taken into account as part of the fit and proper person assessment. Section 10(d) (iv) of the Act prescribes a requirement for launch licensees to consult with Land Information New Zealand ( LINZ ) about any notices to mariners that are required. As these notices are published fortnightly and annually, LINZ has indicated that they do not provide Land Information New Zealand SUMMARY OF FEEDBACK The submission from LINZ notes that the intention behind this section of the Act is to provide for maritime safety by alerting mariners, through LINZ’s ‘Notices to Mariners,’ to the safety considerations arising from rocket launches in New Zealand that the y should be aware of. The fortnightly publishing schedule, long lead times for applications, and the fact that the notices to mariners cannot be easily updated all limit the ability to communicate usefully using these published notices, in this rapidly ev olving context. In essence, it does not provide the timely information to marine rs about rocket launches that other The Review Team recommends that section 10(d)(iv) be repealed and replaced by a requirement to take reasonable steps to notify mariners of the fact a launch is taking place and the times and areas within which it may pose a danger to mariners .
The Act establishes the Registered Engineering Associates (REA) to oversee the registration and discipline of engineering associates.
The Act provides a framework for ensuring the competence of chartered professional engineers by requiring them to undertake continuing professional development. The Act also puts in places measures to discipline chartered professional engineers.
The Act provides a framework for ensuring the competence of registered architects, which requires them to undertake continuing professional development. The Act also puts in place measures to discipline registered architects.
The Act restored protections for workers, especially vulnerable workers, and strengthened the role of collective bargaining in the workplace. Many of the changes were familiar to businesses, as they rolled the law back to how it was as recently as 2015.
The Act sets out a path to identify, and if necessary, address network security risks which may arise from network operators' proposed investments in network equipment. Network operators must engage with the Government Communications Security Bureau (GCSB) about changes to their network equipment where such changes could have an impact on national security.
The Act which introduced the Tax Incentive was passed into law in early May 2019. The following related documents track the progress of the legislation through Parliament and the policy development process:
The Act, which came into force on 1 April 2010, replaced the Plumbers, Gasfitters and Drainlayers Act 1976. The Act introduced:
The Action Plan is guided by Te Tiriti principles.
The Advanced Energy and Material Lab (AEMSLab), a multidisciplinary research group at University of Canterbury, made leaps and bounds in their research in 2017, receiving our Gold Status rating for the second year in a row.
The Advisory Group will support the Taskforce by testing solutions to inform the final recommendations.
The Agreement between New Zealand and the Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen, and Matsu on Economic Cooperation (2013)
The Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, the Return of Astronauts and the Return of Objects Launched into Outer Space (also known as the Rescue Agreement), ratified by New Zealand in 1969;
The Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, the Return of Astronauts and the Return of Objects Launched into Outer Space (the Rescue Agreement), which was ratified by New Zealand in 1969.
The All Vacancies Index is very similar. There are minor differences in the breakdowns of region, industry, occupation and skill level, but these do not change the overall patterns of the time series.
The Ambassador programme is now in six locations around New Zealand, including Auckland, Queenstown, Wanaka and Northland.
The Amendment Act also encourages telecommunications network operators to use lower-impact methods of installation to reduce disruptions to property. The Amendment Act also enables network operators to use existing infrastructure such as electricity lines for deploying fibre in rural areas.
The Amendment Act created a new dispute resolution scheme to protect property owners. This ensures that any disputes that arise as a result of the new consenting regime are dealt with fairly and efficiently. Network operators must become members of the scheme in order to use the rights of access.
The Amendment Act created new Building Code Clause F9 Restricting access to residential pools. We have published 2 Acceptable Solutions for Clause F9.
The Amendment Act enables the use of existing infrastructure (such as electricity lines) for deploying fibre optic cable in rural areas.
The Amendment Act established a new tiered consenting regime that supports different fibre installation methods.
The Annual Report is our main reporting mechanism to Parliament, and is usually tabled in late October. The Annual Report outlines our performance compared to the performance targets set in the previous year's Statement of Performance Expectations.
The Artemis Accords belong to our partners as much as they do to the us, and we thank New Zealand for its commitment to establishing peaceful norms of behavior in space.
The Artemis Accords set principles
The Auckland Policy Office (APO) is a collaborative central government office, located in central Auckland.
The Australian and New Zealand Standard Research Classification (ANZSRC) is a set of 3 related classifications - Type of Activity (ToA), Fields of Research (FoR) and Socio-Economic Objective (SEO).
The Australian and New Zealand Standard Research Classification (ANZSRC) is a set of three related classifications - Type of Activity (ToA), Fields of Research (FoR) and Socio-Economic Objective (SEO).
The Australian government, both at federal and state level, is supporting circular economy developments. Activities include a Circular Economy Ministerial Advisory Group, established in 2023 to provide advice to the Australian Government on the transition to a more circular economy, including regulatory and commercial issues, best practice initiatives, circular economy research, development and innovation needs, and measurement of progress.
The Bali Process Disruption of People Smuggling and Trafficking Working Group, co-chaired by New Zealand and Vietnam, met in October 2022. It combined 2 days of workshop activities and collaborative learning by more than 50 attendees from 16 countries and international organisations.
The Baringa report was commissioned by MBIE to support advice to government on measures to support public EV charging.
The Better Work Action Plan (Action Plan) for Tourism was launched in Queenstown on 1 March 2023, as part of the wider Tourism Industry Transformation Plan (ITP).
The Bill retains provisions in the
The Bill to give effect to the extension was passed into law in November 2024. The Building (Earthquake-prone Building Deadlines and Other Matters) Amendment Act came into effect on 26 November 2024.
The Bill will be binding on the Crown but, like the Act, will not apply in respect of the Armed Forces as defined in section 2(1) of the Defence Act 1990 .
The Bills were introduced on 23 May 2024 and had a first reading on 23 July 2024. The Bills received Royal assent on 29 March 2025.
The Biotechnologies Group will continue to be funded until the end of June 2027 and will transfer to the new bioeconomy PRO once it is established.
The Board is made up of MBIE staff and external members, who provide advice on algorithm use and development, and ensure that algorithms have undergone a robust review by quality experts and adhere to accepted standards.
The Building (Pools) Amendment Act 2016 repealed the Fencing of Swimming Pools Act 1987 and inserted requirements for residential pool safety in the Building Act 2004.
The Building (Pools) Regulations 2016 set out the fees payable by independently qualified pool inspectors and the certificate they will issue if a pool has compliant barriers.
The Building Code is updated bi-annually, in June and November.
The Building Practitioners Board is a statutory body constituted under Part 4 of the Building Act 2004. It plays an important role in the Licensed Building Practitioners Scheme, which was launched in November 2007. Its purpose is to encourage competent building practitioners to build homes right the first time.
The Building and Construction Sector Trends Reporting Package provides regular insights on the key and emerging trends in the building and construction sector.
The Building, Resources and Markets group contribute to:
The Business Payment Practices Act 2023 has been repealed
The Business Payment Practices Act Repeal Act 2024 has come into force.
The CAA is the national aviation regulator, ensuring the safe entry and operation of aircraft within the aviation system.
The COVID-19 disruptions have accelerated the need to change and evolve the tourism data system. The Tourism Data Co-Governance Group was established to create a more collaborative and fit-for- purpose tourism data system.
The COVID-19 pandemic severely impacted tourism in New Zealand. The New Zealand-Aotearoa Government Tourism Strategy sets out a more deliberate and active role for government in tourism. We want to make sure that the many benefits from tourism are realised, while managing the impacts. The Government works as a steward, looking across the system to make sure it is working effectively and as an actor through investments and interventions.
The CPI data for a given quarter is released a couple of weeks after that quarter has ended. This means that for the current quarter we must use a forecast. This forecast is revised with the actual estimated discount when the CPI data for the current quarter is released. We use an Auto Regressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA) model for forecasting.
The CabGuide reminds Ministers and agencies/departments of requirements to consult with the Minister for Auckland on matters requiring Cabinet approval that will have a significant or disproportionate impact for Auckland.
The Cabinet decision did not include implementation details and there are several practical issues with an audit requirement including imposing a cost and compliance burden on employers . It could be confusing for employees to understand their leave entitlement s and pay if methodologies switched as a result of an audit .
The Cabinet paper in response to the proposals of the original Joint Working Group
The Cabinet paper provides the rationale Cabinet to release the All of Government Employment Strategy and Youth Employment Action Plan
The Cabinet paper that sought approval to introduce the former Bill into Parliament
The Capacity Building Network (CBN)
The Capacity Building Network focuses on skills development, human resource management and vocational training through crosscutting collaboration to facilitate 21st century talents, enhance employability and provide quality employment.
The Centre of Digital Excellence (CODE) supports the growth of the creative sector through funding of gaming development, creating pathways into the gaming industry and building the capability of those within the gaming sector. CODE was established in Dunedin in 2019 as a regional development initiative. Our further funding support has enabled CODE to expand its operations to a national level.
The Chartered Professional Engineers Act 2002 protects the title of Chartered Professional Engineer. Only persons registered with Engineering New Zealand (ENZ) may use words, initials, or abbreviations of the title Chartered Professional Engineer.
The Chartered Professional Engineers Council reviews and approve rules containing standards for chartered professional engineering, hears appeals on registrations and disciplinary matters and reports on the performance of the Registration Authority (Engineering New Zealand, formerly known as the Institute of Professional Engineers New Zealand).
The Chorus TSO Deed variation requires Chorus to transition TSO service users to another technology solution if they want to continue to receive TSO telephone service.
The Circular Built Environment Playbook
The Circular Built Environment Playbook report, launched in 2023 by The World Green Building Council, calls on the building and construction sector to accelerate the implementation of circular and regenerative principles. 55% of emissions in the sector are related to energy, but the remaining 45% of emissions are associated with the production and consumption of resources and materials - a challenge that can be addressed through circular practices at every stage of the building and construction lifecycle, from manufacturing to end of life reuse.
The Co-Governance Group is made up of representatives from across government, academia and the tourism industry.
The Code focuses on acting fairly, impartially, responsibly and in a trustworthy manner, all of which are key to our work as public servants.
The Commerce Amendment Act 2018 amended the Commerce Act 1986 (the Commerce Act) to give the Commerce Commission the ability to undertake market studies to determine whether there are any factors that may be impeding competition in a market.
The Commerce Commission is required to review the pricing framework for copper services (no later than 2025) to ensure the new system remains fit for purpose.
The Commerce Commission works out the TSO charge paid to a TSO provider and the proportion of the Telecommunications Development Levy each provider is liable for.
The Commercialisation Partner Network (CPN) builds the capability to turn science findings into commercially viable products.
The Construction Contracts Act 2002 provides a process for dealing with payments and disputes under a construction contract, including retention money provisions to protect subcontractors.
The Construction Sector Accord was signed in April 2019 by Government and industry leaders. It sets out a shared vision, priorities for change and goals to work together for a high performing building and construction sector.
The Consumer Protection team conducts biennial New Zealand Consumer Surveys (NZCS) to find out what adult New Zealanders know about consumer laws and it explores how they behave when they experience problems with products and services. The surveys provide national level insights on the health of the Consumer & Commercial regulatory system, and enable changes to be monitored.
The Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects (also known as the Liability Convention), ratified by New Zealand in 1974;
The Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects (the Liability Convention), which was ratified by New Zealand in 1974.
The Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into Outer Space (the Registration Convention), which New Zealand acceded to in 2018.
The Council is open to ongoing engagement and input from anyone who is part of the startup ecosystem, especially founders.
The Council submitted its report and recommendations to the Government in July 2023.
The Council will be chaired by the Science, Innovation and Technology Minister. The appointment process of up to 8 experts with diverse experience in business, science, innovation and technology will begin as soon as possible, allowing the Council to meet and start work.
The Crown Minerals (Decommissioning and Other Matters) Amendment Act received Royal assent on 1 December 2021 and a number of new provisions are now in force.
The Crown copyright protected material may be reproduced free of charge in any format or media without requiring specific permission. This is subject to the material being reproduced accurately and not being used in a derogatory manner or in a misleading context. Where the material is being published or issued to others, the source and copyright status should be acknowledged. The permission to reproduce Crown copyright protected material does not extend to any material in this report that is identified as being the copyright of a third party. Authorisation to reproduce such material should be obtained from the copyright holders.
The DLR has a long history of scientific research and innovation in space science and engineering, and a proven track record of engaging with their research partners. They have been able to influence and promote the DLR-NZ collaboration with their policy makers and gain support within their team to foster this new relationship.
The Deed has been renewed and amended to take into account changes in objectives and market conditions. The present version was agreed in 1998, and then amended in 2010 and 2013.
The Digital Futures Policy team is now also scoping an AI strategy for New Zealand and creating Responsible AI guidance for business. Both pieces of work are being developed alongside the Department of Internal Affairs (DIA), other partners, and key AI experts in Aotearoa, including the AI Forum.
The Digital Technologies ITP was developed in partnership with industry over the past few years.
The Digital Technologies Industry Transformation Plan outlines a vision and actions across the focus areas to support the transformation of the digital technologies sector.
The Domain Plan set a broad vision and direction for science and innovation data in New Zealand. It identified a need for better information about research and development funding, expenditure, and outputs, so that as a country we would be able to answer enduring questions about how to best design and implement Research, Science and Innovation activity to achieve social, economic, health and environmental objectives.
The EGR fund is contestable and is available to the 23 Great Rides only. Applicants to this fund must be a Great Ride governance organisation.
The EGR fund is only for e-bike charging equipment and installation (for example, connecting directly into the existing power network, but not for extending the network or upgrading transformers). The EGR fund is not intended to be used for additional facilities associated with the charging station (for example, installing a potable water source, toilets, interpretation panels). Great Rides are expected to fund additional facilities by themselves.
The EGR fund is open to Great Ride governance organisations that are:
The ETSP has provided sufficient certainty to incentivise many large-scale events to go ahead and continue organising events from late 2021 until January 2023. The ETSP is now closed.
The ETSP scheme has now closed, and no further applications and claims will be accepted.
The ETSP scheme is designed to provide the confidence needed for organisers of large-scale events to continue organising their events over 2022. The ETSP acts as an insurance-type scheme and covers up to 90% of eligible, unrecoverable costs associated with a cancelled or postponed eligible event. This is designed to act in a similar way to an insurance premium and ensures some risk-sharing under the scheme, which will encourage appropriate decision-making by event organisers and planners.
The Earth System (GEOG111)
The East Asia Summit was set up in 2005 to address the region's political and economic challenges and strategic opportunities. Membership comprises the 10 ASEAN countries and Australia, China, India, Japan, South Korea, the United States, Russia, and New Zealand.
The Economic Development, Science and Innovation Committee held their hearing on the Briefing on Friday 10 February 2023.
The Education and Workforce Committee will report on the Worker Protection (Migrant and Other Employee) Bill. It is expected that the Bill will be passed by Parliament in Quarter 3 2023.
The Electrical Safety Regulations, supported with information and guidance from WorkSafe, govern electrical safety. They are intended to help businesses understand how to manage particular electrical hazards.
The Electrical Workers Registration Board promotes safety for all New Zealanders by ensuring the competence of electrical workers. The Board enhances electrical safety through improving competency of electrical workers in New Zealand and delivering occupational regulatory good practice.
The Electrical Workers Registration Board was established in 1992 to promote safety for all New Zealanders by ensuring the competence of electrical and electronic workers.
The Electricity Authority is an independent Crown entity responsible for the efficient operation of the New Zealand electricity market. Its objective is to promote competition in, reliable supply by, and the efficient operation of, the electricity industry for the long-term benefit of consumers.
The Electrifying the Great Rides (EGR) Fund provides up to $3 million to improve access to the New Zealand cycle trail network by investing in e-bike charging stations on Great Ride cycle trails around the country to rebuild the economy.
The Emergency Caller Location Function has now moved to the Next Generation Critical Communications (NGCC) entity. You can find the information about Emergency Caller Location Information on their website.
The Employment (Leave Entitlements) Bill is intended to repeal and
The Employment Action Plan sets out a programme of actions for government agencies to support more New Zealanders into work and give them greater opportunities to realise their potential.
The Employment Relations (Pay Deductions for Partial Strikes) Amendment Bill, which will reintroduce partial strike provisions, was introduced on 9 December 2024 and is now going through the parliamentary process. The Government has announced its intention to pass this Bill in the Q2 2025 Action Plan that runs from 1 April to 30 June 2025.
The Employment Relations Act 2000 will be amended to clarify contracting arrangements, simplify personal grievances, reduce complexity at the start of employment relationships and reintroduce the ability to make pay deductions in response to partial strikes.
The Employment Relations Act 2000 will be amended to introduce a high-income threshold for unjustified dismissal personal grievance claims.
The Employment Relations Amendment Act 2018 was passed into law on 6 December 2018. It introduced a number of employment law changes that aimed to improve fairness in the workplace and deliver decent work conditions and fair wages.
The Employment Relations Authority/Court could otherwise determine that the real nature of the relationship means that the worker is an
The Employment Relations Authority/Court may determine that the real nature of the relationship is a contracting arrangement.
The Employment Standards Legislation Act aims to encourage fair and productive workplaces and ensure employment law responds to a dynamic business environment.
The Employment Strategy provides direction to ensure government initiatives and programmes contribute to a well-functioning labour market. The purpose of the Strategy is to improve the employment outcomes of all New Zealanders. It is intended to help guide government work programmes across the employment, education and training system. The framework can be used as a tool for analysis to identify gaps and opportunities for new initiatives and the trade-offs between different policy options.
The Endeavour Fund plays a unique role in the science system through an open, contestable process with a focus on both research excellence and impact.
The Energy Efficiency and Conservation Authority (EECA) encourages, supports, and promotes energy efficiency, energy conservation, and the use of renewable sources of energy in New Zealand.
The Energy publications and technical papers page lists energy statistics and modelling publications and technical papers, reports and guides, produced by or for us.
The Engineering Associates Act 1961 establishes a voluntary registration framework for engineering associates. The Act provides for the training and experience a person must have before they may be registered as an engineering associate.
The Engineering Associates Registration Board approves registration of engineering associates, exercises disciplinary powers and encourages improved competence and qualification of engineering technologists.
The Entertainment Venues Association of New Zealand
The Envirolink Scheme funds Crown research institutes, universities and private research organisations to provide regional councils with advice and research on environmental projects.
The Envirolink scheme supports regional councils translating science knowledge into practical management advice and adapting management tools for local needs. The scheme is limited to environmental science and cannot fund business as usual activities. Funding is administered by the Ministry of Business, Innovation & Employment - Science and Innovation.
The Equal Pay Amendment Act introduces a practical and accessible process to raise and consider claims of systemic sex-based pay undervaluation in pay in female-dominated occupations.
The Equity, Diversity and Inclusion (EDI) Capability Fund seeks to support research organisations to identify and break down barriers to attracting, retaining and growing an equitable, diverse and inclusive workforce.
The European Commission adopted their Circular Economy Action Plan (CEAP) in 2020, a key component of the European Green Deal, which contains initiatives along the entire life cycle of products. A digital product passports initiative is one of the key actions under the Circular Economy Action Plan (CEAP) and part of the proposed Ecodesign for Sustainable Products Regulation.
The European Space Agency is recruiting for astronauts and imagine my joy when I got a letter from them inviting me to the second phase of recruiting, the test in Hamburg, in November 2021. I am a New Zealander but also a Romanian so I could apply for the job, which I did. I think this is the most important thing about everything we do in life, if an opportunity shows, have the courage and put yourself out there. Just like me, 23,307 applicants put themselves out there.
The European Space Agency/New Zealand Arrangement
The Events Transition Support Payment (ETSP) scheme was designed to provide assurance to organisers of large-scale events, so they could continue organising our much anticipated events over 2022.
The External Reporting Board is an independent Crown entity responsible for developing and issuing accounting, auditing and assurances standards in New Zealand.
The Extreme Wildfire Programme, led by Scion, demonstrates excellence and impact for understanding and preparing New Zealand for the expected increase in wildfires due to climate change.
The FOR classification allows R&D activity to be categorised according to the field of research. In this respect, it is the methodology used in the R&D that is being considered. The SEO classification allows R&D to be categorised according to the purpose or outcome of the R&D as perceived by the researcher. It consists of discrete economic, social, technological or scientific domains for identifying the principal purposes of the R&D.
The FOR classification has 3 hierarchical levels, namely Divisions (at the broadest level), Groups and Fields (at the finest level). The Division represents a broad subject area or research discipline while groups and fields within represent increasingly detailed dissections of these categories. Divisions, Groups and Fields are assigned unique 2-digit; 4-digit; and 6-digit identification (ID) codes respectively.
The Fair Pay Agreements Act Repeal Act received Royal assent on 19 December 2023 and came into force on 20 December 2023. This Act repeals the Fair Pay Agreements legislation.
The Fair Pay Agreements Bill was introduced into Parliament on 29 March 2022 and received Royal Assent on 1 November 2022.
The Fair Pay Agreements system aimed to bring together unions and employer associations to bargain for employment terms and conditions for all covered employees in an industry or occupation. The system included support for bargaining parties to help them navigate the bargaining process and reach an outcome, as well as processes to ensure compliance.
The Final Better Work Action Plan is expected to be delivered in late 2022 (following consultation on a draft Action Plan), and the scoping for the environment phase is expected to be completed in mid-2022.
The Financial Markets Authority enforces securities, financial reporting and company law as they apply to financial services and securities markets. It also regulates securities exchanges, financial advisers and brokers, trustees and issuers including issuers of KiwiSaver and superannuation schemes. It will shortly also regulate auditors.
The Financial Markets Conduct Act 2013 (FMC Act) governs how financial products are offered, promoted, issued and sold, and the ongoing responsibilities of those who offer, issue, manage, supervise, deal in, and trade them. The FMC Act also regulates the provision of certain financial services (including financial advice services) and the conduct of financial institutions.
The Flexible Working at MBIE Policy aligns with the following MBIE guiding principles:
The Food and Beverage Project produces a range of reports about the food and beverage sector in New Zealand including emerging growth reports and in-depth reports.
The Food and Beverage Project produces guides to investment opportunities in the New Zealand food and beverage sector.
The Food and Beverage Project publishes comprehensive, data-driven reports on the current and evolving state of New Zealand's food and beverage sector.
The Forced Labour Protocol 2014 is an international, legally-binding document that provides guidance on how to eliminate all forms of forced labour, punish offenders and protect victims, including ensuring they have access to remedies such as compensation.
The Foundation is administered by 5 Trustees. The Trustees are the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety (Chairperson), the President and the Chief Executive of Business NZ, and the President and the Secretary of the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions (CTU).
The Foundation was established in 1977 under the Charitable Trusts Act 1957.
The Future of Work Tripartite Forum (The Forum), which first met in August 2018, is a partnership between the Government, Business New Zealand as representatives of business groups, and the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions as representatives of unions. The Forum aims to support New Zealand businesses and workers to meet the challenges and opportunities presented in a rapidly changing world of work, and provides a place for these 3 social partners to discuss issues and work together to identify and implement solutions.
The Future of Work Tripartite Forum has been disestablished
The GCDR worked to build capability across government to design and deliver appropriate and accessible dispute resolution. This included providing advice and support to dispute resolution schemes and government agencies on best practice.
The Game Development Sector Rebate scheme (GDSR) is a $40 million per year scheme to support the development and growth of New Zealand's game development sector.
The Gas Safety and Measurement Regulations prescribe:
The Gene Technology Bill, which allows for the greater use of gene technology while ensuring strong protections for the health and safety of people and the environment, is now going through the parliamentary process.
The General Manager People and Culture will assess the effectiveness of this policy. The following measures of success outline what we expect to see if the policy is working:
The General Manager People and Culture will monitor compliance with this policy as follow:
The Government - funded health sector has longstanding challenges complying with the Holidays Act 2003 –
The Government Centre for Dispute Resolution (GCDR) was established to build capability across government to design and deliver appropriate and accessible dispute resolution.
The Government agreed in June 2015 to targeted consultation on the proposed Accident Compensation Appeal Tribunal.
The Government announced the following changes to the adventure activity regulatory regime on 1 October 2022 to support improved safety. The full press release is available here:
The Government asked us to evaluate the amendments by 2020. We are regularly monitoring progress to see how the intended outcomes are being achieved.
The Government committed to stopping ITPs as part of the National-Act Coalition Agreement and its 100-Day Plan.
The Government considered it was important that time was taken to get it right first time in order to minimise the risk of implementation challenges and future compliance issues.
The Government established the Holidays Act Taskforce to suggest improvements to the Holidays Act, following a joint request from unions and employers.
The Government facilitates access to language assistance services, such as interpreting and translation services, to help clients with limited English access public services and information.
The Government has agreed in-principle for work to commence on bringing together the significant capabilities and resources of the National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research Limited (NIWA) and the Meteorological Service of New Zealand Limited (MetService).
The Government has announced an extensive review of the management of seismic risk in existing buildings. The purpose of the Review is to ensure seismic risk in existing buildings is being managed effectively and in a workable, proportionate way.
The Government has announced changes to set an income threshold above which a personal grievance could not be pursued and remove eligibility for remedies where the employee is at-fault.
The Government has been considering how to provide better protections for contractors.
The Government has been considering how to provide better protections for contractors. In summary:
The Government has closed the Industry Transformation Plan (ITP) programme. The Digital Technologies ITP was developed between 2019-2023. This page records historical information on previous ITP initiatives for reference only.
The Government has created a new one-off public holiday on 26 September 2022 to mark the passing of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II.
The Government has decided that from 1 July 2023 Tourism New Zealand will return to its usual role of promoting New Zealand as a visitor destination to international visitors only, now that the New Zealand borders are open, and we are in post pandemic recovery mode. The Minister will retain the ability to reactivate the domestic marketing activity in the event of an extreme shock that has a significant impact nationally on our tourism sector, should the Government decide it necessary.
The Government has established 2 new awards to recognise the talented people working in New Zealand's space and advanced aviation sectors and inspire young people.
The Government has established a consumer data right through the Customer and Product Data Act 2025. The Act establishes an economy-wide framework to enable greater access to, and sharing of, customer and product data between businesses. This gives individuals and businesses greater choice and control over their data.
The Government has introduced a Bill that will reintroduce partial strike provisions in the Employment Relations Act 2000. This will enable employers to make pay deductions in response to partial strike action.
The Government has made law changes to the Credit Contracts and Consumer Finance Act. This follows our 2018 review of the consumer credit law.
The Government has reached agreements with a number of infrastructure providers for a $300 million infrastructure roll out to bring more and faster broadband to rural areas over the next 6 years.
The Government has reached detailed decisions about which obligations should apply to BNPL loans, which have been informed by public consultation.
The Government has recently introduced a requirement for country of origin information for certain foods. This page provides information about these new changes.
The Government has responded to the recommendations proposed in the Electricity Price Review (EPR).
The Government has today confirmed that NIWA will be acquiring MetService as a wholly-owned subsidiary. The announcement follows the in-principle decision made last year on the acquisition.
The Government invested heavily in the sector to strengthen tourism for when the border reopened. Our economy also responded well, with people finding new employment outside tourism and some tourism firms pivoting to the domestic market or to alternative offerings.
The Government is aware of issues with the Holidays Act and that these have been a longstanding concern for workers, employers and payroll providers. Resolving these issues is a priority for the Government.
The Government is considering modernising the voltage range allowed in regulations for the supply of electricity to support more rooftop solar panels and reduce electricity costs.
The Government is considering regulating corded window coverings under a product safety standard to address the risk that they pose to young children. Protecting young children is considered a high priority, as they are not able to take independent measures to protect themselves.
The Government is developing a New Zealand Energy Strategy to support the transition to a low carbon economy, address strategic challenges in the energy sector, and signal pathways away from fossil fuels.
The Government is exploring measures to ensure electricity is reliable, affordable and resilient during the transition to an expanded and more renewable electricity system.
The Government is introduced additional protections for businesses and consumers against unfair commercial practices.
The Government is introducing a self-certification scheme for trusted building professionals and a requirement for Building Consent Authorities (BCA) to help reduce inspection wait times.
The Government is investing $15 million for Stage Three of the project. This phase begins in 2022 and will test the feasibility of the recommendations in the masterplan.
The Government is investing an extra $13.5 million in international marketing to bring more visitors to New Zealand.
The Government is moving forward with recommendations from the Tourism Data Leadership Group, including establishing a new Tourism Data Partnership Fund.
The Government is progressing legislation to implement a new offshore renewable energy generation regime which will support investment in, and delivery of, clean energy at scale.
The Government is progressing reforms to streamline financial services.
The Government is rebalancing the immigration system to support its plan for a higher-productivity, higher-wage economy.
The Government is reviewing consumer credit law as part of a wider reform process for financial services. This section also includes information about previous reviews of consumer credit law.
The Government is taking action to enable private investment in hydrogen. Low-emissions hydrogen is a key tool for reducing emissions in parts of the economy that are less suited to electrification, such as heavy transport and heavy industry.
The Government seeks your feedback on the Engine Fuel Specifications Regulations 2011, that set the parameters for the quality of marine fuel oils, petrol, diesel, ethanol, biodiesel, and blends of these fuels, that are sold or supplied to the public in New Zealand.
The Government undertook targeted consultation in September 2024 on a draft Bill with proposed reforms to the Holidays Act. The targeted consultation sought feedback on the technical and policy details of the draft Bill, and on alternative options to improve its simplicity and workability.
The Government wants to harness the great ideas held outside Government to push even harder for growth.
The Government welcomed feedback on changes to these rules and encouraged people to have their say at Select Committee. The Health Select Committee closed submissions at 11.59pm on Monday, 17 February 2025.
The Government will also consider how this policy will apply to the new PROs. The intention is for researchers to receive a share of the financial rewards from commercialising IP.
The Government will be reviewing consumer credit law to ensure settings are targeted appropriately to the risk profile of the lending. MBIE is developing terms of reference for the review. This section also includes information about previous reviews of consumer credit law.
The Government will keep prioritising spending to areas where it matters most and will drive change to ensure that regulatory and tax settings do not hinder productivity. Ensuring that government expenditure represents value for money, and pursuing a credible path to surplus will allow fiscal headroom for the government to pursue ambitious policies for economic growth.
The Government will move to ensure the right settings and incentives are in place for intellectual property (IP) to generate greater commercial and economic benefits from our science, innovation and tertiary education sectors.
The Government's detailed responses to the Productivity Commission's 24 recommendations.
The Government, Business New Zealand and the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions are proposing a new way of better protecting workers and the economy: a New Zealand Income Insurance scheme (NZIIS).
The Government, through our Ministry and the Ministry for Primary Industries, is matching this contribution, bringing total funding to $4.1 million per annum. It is expected that funding for the centre will grow over time.
The Great Rides of the New Zealand Cycle Trail network are predominantly off-road trails. They showcase the best of New Zealand's landscapes, environment, culture and heritage. The trails are located around the country from Northland to Southland.
The Green Paper was the first step in Te Ara Paerangi - Future Pathways programme. It signalled the start of the multi-year reform process to build Aotearoa New Zealand a future-focused research, science, and innovation system.
The Heartland Rides are mostly on-road routes through scenic landscapes and small towns, and the Connector Rides link the Great Rides and Heartland Rides with urban centres, transport hubs and other key tourist attractions. Heartland and Connector Rides encourage cyclists to use scenic back-country roads where they can experience heartland New Zealand.
The High Tech Manufacturing Report provides data and analysis on New Zealand's high and medium high technology manufacturers.
The Holidays (Increasing Sick Leave) Amendment Act 2021.
The Holidays Act 2003 sets out the minimum entitlements to holidays and leave, and payment for them, that employers are obliged to provide to their employees. It is an Act that touches the lives of every employee in New Zealand. Its purpose is to promote balance between work and other aspects of employees’ lives by providing minimum entitlements to annual holidays, public holidays, sick leave and bereavement leave. However, it has become evident in recent years that widespread non -compliance with the current Act is affecting employers and employees right across the New Zealand economy and is costing employers and employees significant sums of money . To address this, i n May 2018, the Minister of Workplace Relations and Safety established a Taskforce to review the Holidays Act 20 03 (the Act) and recommend changes. The tripartite Taskforce , which includes employer, employee and government representatives , gives us the opportunity to work together to find a better sol ution. I am confident that this review will be more successful tha n previous reviews for two key reasons. First, there is strong agreement across government, employers and unions that a review is needed, and a genuine recognition that a collaborative approach is the best way to identify a preferred solution. Second, we n ow have a much better understanding of the issues the Act causes for employers and employees and so are better placed to ensure that any proposed solution will address these issues. Our recommendations will be thoroughly tested with payroll providers and p rofessionals so we know they will work in practice, not just in theory. To be successful the Taskforce first needs to gain a full understanding of the issues the current Act causes. While the members of the Taskforce bring together significant expertise i n relation to the Holidays Act, we do not claim to have all the answers. This Issues Paper sets out our understanding of the key issues employers, employees and payroll providers face in trying to implement the Act. We want to hear your views on some key questions: o are the issues outlined in this paper described accurately? o have you experienced any other issues working with the Act that are not captured in this paper? If so, what are these issues? o do you have any suggestions or proposals for change? Your v iews will be used to inform the work of the Taskforce in developing solutions. We are seeking feedback by Friday 12 October and I encourage you to have your say .
The Holidays Act Taskforce (the Taskforce) seeks written submissions on the issues raised in this document by 12 October . Questions are posed throughout the document to guide your submission. Your submission may respond to any or all of these questions. We also encourage your input on any other relevant issues. Where possible, please include evidence to support your views, for example references to independent research, facts and figures, or relevant examples. You can make your submission:  By completing an online sub mission form at MBIE’s website www.mbie.govt.nz  By sending your submission as a Microsoft Word document to holidays.act.review@mbie.govt.nz  By mailing your submission to: Holidays Act Review Ministry of Business, Innovation & Employment PO Box 1473 Wellington 6140 New Zealand Please direct any questions that you have in relation to the submissions process to holidays.act.review@mbie.govt.nz . Use of information The information provided in submissions will be used by the Taskforce to inform its recommendations on changes to holidays’ legislation. It is not being requested for enforcement purposes. We may contact submitters directly if we require clarification of any matters in submissions. Release of information and submissions Submissions will not be proactively published although a summary of submissions may be released which may include information you provide . Submissions may be the subject of requests for information under the Official Information Act 1982 (“OIA”). Please set out clearly in your submission if you object to the release of any information in the submission and, in particular, which part (or parts) you consider should be withheld together with your reasons for withholding the information. Examples could include that you have provided commercially sensitive material, or you have privacy concerns. We will take such objections into account when responding to requests under the OIA. Any decision to withhold information requested under the OIA can be reviewed by the Ombudsman. Permission to reproduce The copyright owner authorises reproduction of this work, in whole or in part, as long as no charge is being made for the supply of copies, and the integrity and attribution of the work as a publication of the Holidays Act Taskforce is not interfered with in any way.
The Housing Affordability Measure (HAM) is now produced by the Ministry of Housing and Urban Development.
The Human Frontiers Science Programme
The Human Resources Development Working Group
The Hundertwasser Art Centre, Whangarei
The IEF co-ordinates the Joint Oil Organisations Data Initiative which aims to improve oil data transparency, and in turn improve oil price volatility.
The IEF is a bi-annual gathering of the world's energy ministers. It has become the leading platform for producer-consumer dialogue between the International Energy Agency (IEA), member countries of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), and Russia, China and India.
The IEF's Secretariat has headquarters in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, to enhance and provide continuity to the producer-consumer dialogue at ministerial level.
The ILO is based in Geneva, Switzerland. Its 3000 staff cover 5 regional offices (Europe, Americas, Middle East, Asia-Pacific, and Africa) and some 60 area or branch offices.
The ILO was established in 1919 by the then League of Nations. After the formation of the United Nations (UN) in 1946, it became one of the first specialist UN agencies.
The ITP set out 4 immediate focus areas:
The IVL annual performance reports are co-owned by MBIE and the Department of Conservation. They record how the revenue generated by the IVL is allocated, and measure the yearly progress made by the projects the IVL funds. Each reporting year runs from 1 July to 30 June.
The IVL is a $100 levy that is charged to most international visitors to New Zealand. It aims to address current challenges in the tourism and conservation systems.
The Industry Focus Group provides advice to MBIE on gene technology regulation impact focussing on trade, market access (global regulations), consumer perceptions, New Zealand branding, competitiveness in the global market, commercial and economic impact. They also ensure that the regulation will be efficient, effective, consistent and practical to implement and will test policy options.
The Initiative is a partnership between the IEF and 6 other international organisations, including the IEA, Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC), United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and OPEC.
The Innovation Programme for Tourism Recovery was a contestable fund for projects that will have meaningful impact across the tourism system.
The Insolvency Review Working Group was a panel of experts set up in November 2015 to examine aspects of corporate insolvency law.
The Institute of Environmental Science and Research Limited (ESR) is a Crown research institute providing science advice and services to government agencies, local authorities and the private sector. Its purpose is to deliver enhanced scientific and research services to the public health, food safety, security and justice systems and the environmental sector.
The International Labour Policy Team leads New Zealand's international engagement and policy advice on labour standards and settings through the International Labour Organization and other multilateral fora such as APEC.
The International Space Institute specialises in providing graduate level training to the future leaders of the emerging global space community at its Central Campus in Strasbourg, France and at locations around the world, including a 5-week Southern Hemisphere Space Studies Program.
The International Sustainability Standards Board (ISSB) issued its inaugural standards for sustainability-related disclosures in global capital markets in June 2023.
The International Visitor Survey (IVS) measures the expenditure, characteristics, and behaviours of international visitors to New Zealand.
The Internet of Things (IoT)
The Interpreter Standards Transition Support (ISTS) package funded course fees for individual interpreters. This reflected the importance placed on equipping interpreters wishing to apply for NAATI accreditation with the knowledge, skills and competencies they need to deliver interpreting services at the required standard.
The Jobs Online quarterly report measures changes in online job advertisements from 4 internet job boards.
The Just Transition programme
The Just Transition programme is now closed.
The Just Transition programme was established to help share and coordinate the work of transitioning New Zealand to a low emissions economy.
The Just Transitions programme was established to help share and coordinate the work of transitioning New Zealand to a low emissions economy.
The LAS programme established a new, comprehensive framework to deliver high quality, consistent and coordinated language assistance services across Government. It comprises of three separate but interconnected projects.
The Labour Inspectorate continues to investigate cases responding to serious non-compliance with employment law. Between 1 July 2021 and 16 May 2022, 55 cases were filed with the Employment Relations Authority (ERA) and Employment Court relating to migrant exploitation, seeking arrears and/or penalties. Since July 2022 a further 4 applications to the ERA have been made. Cases are proactively promoted to achieve systemic behavioural change from employers from individual cases, with 40 articles published between 1 July 2022 and 29 November 2022.
The Labour Inspectorate has a significant role to play as the 3.4 regulator, and is also an important user of the Act 40. The Labour Inspectorate, as an operational unit within the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, is responsible for ensuring compliance with the Holidays Act. It also plays an important role in assisting employers to understand their obligations, and enabling employees to ensure they receive their correct entitlements by enforcing the Act . 41. The Inspectorate initiated a Payroll Strategy in 2015 that included a programme of proactive audits and investigations (and, subsequently, a number of ‘watching briefs’ in which employers undertake their own audit, remediation and rectification programmes agreeing to some review by the Inspectorate) to identify issues with payroll systems and remediate employees. In addition to the programme of audits and investigations, the Strategy involved: o an extensive stakeholder engagement/co -design programme to better equip businesses to comply o a proactive information and education programme. 42. The Payroll Strategy work is now complete, though a small team focusing on audits and investigations remains within the Inspectorate. One of the outputs of the Payroll Strategy was the publication of revised guidance on compliance with the Act which was produced in collaboration with professional services provide rs including payroll providers , employment law experts , and employer and employee representatives. Stakeholders have reported that this guidance is proving useful but that it also highlights ongoing difficulties with the Act. The Labour Inspectorate has al so issued position statements relating to compliance with the Act, to provide employers with further clarity about the Inspectorate’s approach. 43. As noted above, the Labour Inspectorate is responsible for ensuring compliance with the Holidays Act 2003. As pa rt of its review, the Taskforce may consider, and make
The Labour Inspectorate, as the regulator for the employment relations an d standards regulatory system, would be responsible for enforcing and monitoring the new arrangements, and ensuring that sufficient support is provided to employers, employees and payroll providers during the implementation period.
The Labour Market Scorecard was a quarterly update of labour market statistics and indicators. It provided an overview of the state of the labour market.
The Labour Market Statistics Snapshots are a quarterly update of labour market statistics, and provide an overview of the current state of the labour market.
The Labour and Social Protection Network (LSPN)
The Labour and Social Protection Network is a forum for sharing best practice on labour and social protection issues with other APEC economies.
The Labour, Science and Enterprise Group is headed by Deputy Secretary Nic Blakeley.
The Labour, Science and Enterprise group works with people, businesses, regions, and the science, innovation and education systems to help the country and New Zealanders to be successful.
The Land Transport (Wheel Clamping) Amendment Act passed in November 2019, and introduces new requirements to regulate the maximum fee that wheel clamping operators can charge. The Act:
The Language Assistance Services (LAS) Programme has been a multiyear project managed by the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE).
The Language Assistance Services (LAS) Programme was created to address language barriers in accessing public services and information. This initiative came about after reviews in 2015 and 2016 highlighted the need for improved interpreter and translation services in the public sector.
The Language Assistance Services (LAS) Programme was established in 2017 to implement the recommendations of a comprehensive review of the provision of interpreting and other language assistance services across the public sector. The goal of the programme, which is co-led by MBIE and DIA, is toensure equal access to government-funded services for all New Zealanders, regardless of their English proficiency. This will be achieved by addressing the quality, quantity, and accessibility of language assistance services across the public sector.
The Levy recognised that intervention was required to ensure rural and remote areas of New Zealand have access to fast broadband and mobile services. Over $430 million in grant funding from the Telecommunications Development Levy has been allocated to RBI, to ensure that more New Zealanders can experience the benefits of improved connectivity.
The Licensed Building Practitioner (LBP) scheme was introduced in November 2007. From 1 March 2012, building practitioners must be licensed in order to carry out or supervise work on homes and small-medium sized apartment buildings that is critical to the integrity of the building.
The MBIE Enterprise Compliance function can also provide advice to the ARA Committee on whether the Policy Owner is adequately performing their duties.
The MBIE Science Whitinga Fellowship is aimed at supporting excellent early career researchers impacted by COVID-19 in the New Zealand research science system. This is a one-off initiative and will provide support of around $10 million over two years for 30 Fellows.
The MBIE business units expected to utilise the voluntary information sharing provisions include Immigration New Zealand, Employment Services and the Labour Inspectorate. These teams require personal information from other agencies to provide services and support to families and young people. They will be able to engage more freely with other CWPAs when appropriate for purposes relating to the safety and wellbeing of those children and young people under the Oranga Tamariki Act, as well as continuing to report if they suspect harm or neglect as they always have.
The MTAGDP estimates data also includes the Regional GDP totals for regional council areas. The nominal MTAGDP estimates align (sum to) the nominal GDP totals for regional council areas from the Regional GDP series, which in turn aligns to the annual nominal national GDP totals. This makes comparison with the official Statistics New Zealand published data series possible and valid.
The MTAGDP estimates data are an extension of Statistics New Zealand's Regional GDP series (an official Tier 1 statistic), which provides annual nominal GDP for 15 regional council areas (Tasman and Nelson are combined) and 18 industry groups.
The MTAGDP series is updated annually, as soon as possible after Statistics New Zealand (Stats NZ) releases its annual update to its Regional GDP series (usually at the end of March).
The Manager Legal Services (Litigation) will assess the effectiveness of this policy based on the following measures of success:
The Manager Legal Services (Litigation) will monitor compliance with this policy as follows:
The Measurement Standards Laboratory will also transfer to an appropriate PRO.
The Migrant Youth Information Project comprises:
The Migrant Youth Information Project was a one-off research project which resulted in 2 publications in 2017.
The Migration Data Explorer enables users to easily access data on the number of visa applications and the number of migrants in New Zealand.
The Minister also sets the criteria against which the Board makes funding decisions. The criteria are published in the New Zealand Gazette.
The Minister and Associate Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety are proactively releasing the titles of documents received from MBIE.
The Minister and Associate Minister of Immigration are proactively releasing the titles of documents received from MBIE.
The Minister for ACC is proactively releasing the titles of documents received from MBIE.
The Minister for ACC will update the House of Representatives on whether a full review of Schedule 2 will occur and the rationale for that decision, to support transparency throughout the framework.
The Minister for Auckland is proactively releasing the titles of documents received from MBIE.
The Minister for Building and Construction is proactively releasing the titles of documents received from MBIE.
The Minister for Economic Growth is proactively releasing the titles of documents received from MBIE.
The Minister for Energy and the Minister for Resources have initiated a review of the performance of electricity markets. The review began in early 2025 and is expected to be completed in June 2025.
The Minister for Energy is proactively releasing the titles of documents received from MBIE.
The Minister for Media and Communications is proactively releasing the titles of documents received from MBIE.
The Minister for Regional Development is proactively releasing the titles of documents received from MBIE.
The Minister for Social Development and Employment is proactively releasing the titles of documents received from MBIE.
The Minister for Space announced the release of the New Zealand Space and Advanced Aviation Strategy in September 2024.
The Minister for Space is proactively releasing the titles of documents received from MBIE.
The Minister for Space is provided with a briefing from MBIE officials which includes relevant assessment information and advice on each payload application. They are also separately advised of any risks from the Minister responsible for the GCSB and NZSIS. On the basis of this information, the Minister determines whether or not to grant the payload permit
The Minister for Tourism and Hospitality is proactively releasing the titles of documents received from MBIE.
The Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety is required by law to review the minimum wages annually, to take effect 1 April each year.
The Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety recommends that the Committee:
The Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety will seek Cabinet decisions on further issues in the coming months.
The Minister for Workplace Relations has identified the following main objectives of the reform:
The Minister intends to seek Cabinet decisions on the new approach in 2025, once the details have been designed. There will be an opportunity for all stakeholders to provide input on the Bill once it is introduced and considered by Select Committee.
The Minister may make a recommendation to amend Schedule 1A if he is satisfied that the following criteria are met. The criteria are:
The Minister may recommend that the Governor-General adds a category of employees to Schedule 1A, by Order in Council. The Minister must first be satisfied that all 3 of the following criteria are met:
The Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs is proactively releasing the titles of documents received from MBIE.
The Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs is the minister responsible for the Commerce Commission, and appointed us as its monitoring agent.
The Minister of Local Government is leading the group of Ministers responsible for matters relating to the economic and social recovery following the Whakaari/White Island eruption. The Minister of Local Government is also the territorial authority for Whakaari/White Island under the Local Government Act.
The Minister of Resources is proactively releasing the titles of documents received from MBIE.
The Minister of Science, Innovation and Technology is proactively releasing the titles of documents received from MBIE.
The Minister of Small Business and Manufacturing is proactively releasing the titles of documents received from MBIE.
The Ministers' press release and the Reconvened Joint Working Group's Principles on the Beehive website
The Ministry endeavours to the best of our ability and knowledge to ensure that the information on this website is accurate and current. However, we cannot accept any liability for the accuracy or content of material on this website.
The Ministry for Ethnic Communities has also developed other online learning modules to support government agencies, and public servants who provide services or engage with people from Culturally And Linguistically Diverse (CALD) communities. These modules may be of interest to your staff:
The Ministry for the Environment is the government's principal adviser on environmental and climate change issues. However, we also contribute to the development of environmental and climate change policies because of their relevance to energy efficiency and resource development, including:
The Ministry has a compliance strategy in place which is currently under review. One aspect of the strategy is monitoring of satellites launched from New Zealand . MBIE has entered an agreement with Leo Labs, a company that specialises in space situational awareness , that allows it to monitor satellites launched from New Zealand. This is innovative technology allows MBIE to monitor satellites launched from New Zealand in real time. MBIE and LeoLabs have ongoing discussions about how this technology may be built upon to improve compliance monitoring in the future.
The Ministry of Business Innovation and Employment are looking for submissions on the issues raised in the document.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation & Employment (MBIE) commissioned this research to explore how Aotearoa New Zealand can increase the value generated from our biological resources and how these resources can be used more efficiently to reduce emissions.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation & Employment (MBIE) is the lead agency for this work alongside the Environmental Protection Authority, Ministry for Primary Industries, Ministry of Health, the Ministry for the Environment and the Department of Conservation.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation & Employment (MBIE) released a discussion document and consulted on an exposure draft of the initial Regulations in May 2021.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade (MFAT) are working together on a joint Long-term Insights Briefing in 2024/2025.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) are now in a position to
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) has awarded the Moana Project Gold Status for exceeding excellence and impact in their work. The project supports a sustainable seafood sector by advancing understanding of ocean circulation, connectivity and risks from marine extremes.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) has completed a targeted review of the health and safety regulatory regime for adventure activities, looking at how it operates when activities take place in naturally-hazardous environments.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) has today convened the first meeting of the Gas Security Response Group.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) has undertaken a targeted review of the health and safety regulatory regime for adventure activities, looking at how it operates when activities take place in naturally-hazardous environments.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) is a founding signatory to the Algorithm charter for Aotearoa New Zealand and is committed to applying its principles in our use of algorithms.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) is seeking feedback on a draft of the Digital Technologies Industry Transformation Plan.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) is seeking feedback on a range of options to control the risks from engineered stone and other sources of exposure to respirable crystalline silica.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) is seeking feedback on an exposure draft of the Patents Amendment Bill. This draft Bill amends the Patents Act 2013.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) is seeking views on proposed new settings for the Skilled Migrant Category residence visa by 18 November 2022.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) is seeking written submissions on proposals for fees and levies that would recover the costs of operating the New Zealand Companies Office (the Companies Office) and its associated statutory registers. The Companies Office is a business unit within MBIE.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) may share application information with other agencies in order to assist the Minister in the performance or exercise of functions, duties, or powers under the Outer Space and High-altitude Activities Act 2017.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) provides advice on relevant international labour issues and assesses the impact of international developments on New Zealand's labour interests.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) provides advice to the Government on telecommunications policy and regulation. In 2024, MBIE sought feedback on some regulatory issues and proposed options to improve telecommunications regulatory and funding frameworks.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) seeks written submissions on the issues raised in the discussion document by 5pm on 18 April 2019.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) undertook a process evaluation of the Pilot, based on interviews and administrative data, to inform decisions on any future intakes under the CORS Category. The evaluation was undertaken about three months after the sponsored refugees arrived in New Zealand and assesses how well the Pilot has been implemented, what early outputs have been achieved and what improvements could be made if it were rolled out further.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) would like your feedback on proposals on updating the Accident Compensation (Review Costs and Appeals) Regulations 2002.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE), with support from Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC), is responsible for using this review framework to support, if needed, changes to the list of occupational diseases which can be covered by ACC.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment began a 4 year pilot of the Global Impact Visa (GIV) in mid-2017. An evaluation of the pilot was commenced in late-2017. The purpose of the evaluation was to assess the implementation, outputs and early outcomes of the Global Impact Visa pilot.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment does not accept any liability for the accuracy or content of information on this website that belongs to third parties; nor for the accuracy or content of any third-party website that you may access via a hyperlink from this site.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment has convened a group of experts to provide advice on strengthening the science, innovation and technology system, including the challenges and aspirations of the sector, and opportunities for growth.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment is seeking feedback on a proposed 5th edition of the Government Procurement Rules.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment is the steward of New Zealand's building and construction regulatory system. We work alongside building practitioners, government agencies, other regulators and the wider construction industry to understand what matters to the sector and to improve the regulatory system.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment led the review, and Minister Nash has agreed to the Report's recommendations.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment logo, and any other MBIE trade mark or logo, may not be used on your site without our prior written permission.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment recently consulted on proposed changes to the postal Deed of Understanding. Submissions on this consultation closed on 10 December 2024, and we are currently working through next steps. You can read about the proposed changes that were consulted on here.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation, and Employment (MBIE) has developed a definition of energy hardship and an initial set of measures that will be used to monitor energy hardship over time.
The Ministry of Education has convened an advisory group to provide independent advice on the university sector. Given the close ties between the university and science systems, both groups are being chaired by Professor Sir Peter Gluckman.
The Ministry of Social Development (MSD) Sector allocation of ANZSIC classes has been updated. Refer to the Ministry of Social Development Sector output data dictionary for the updated list.
The Mobile Black Spot Fund (MBSF) is providing greater mobile coverage on approximately 1,400 kilometres of state highways and in over 168 tourism locations where no coverage currently exists.
The Monthly Regional Tourism Estimates (MRTEs) provide an estimate of regional monthly expenditure on tourism from both international and domestic consumers.
The NESTF enables quicker and easier installation of low-impact infrastructure by telecommunications companies, speeding up access to broadband for consumers.
The NESTF provides greater national consistency, and removes the requirement for resource consents for equipment such as cabinets, poles and aerials, provided the main standards are met. This saves time and money for both telecommunications companies and local councils, while ensuring any effects on the environment are minimised and managed appropriately.
The NZ Battery Project was set up in 2020 to explore possible renewable energy storage solutions for when our hydro lakes run low for long periods. A pumped hydro scheme at Lake Onslow was one of the options being explored. The Government stopped the Lake Onslow investigations in late 2023.
The NZ Government is managing the decommissioning of the Tui oil field assets in the wake of the financial problems affecting the permit operator Tamarind Taranaki Ltd.
The NZ Industrial Relations Foundation (Inc) (the Foundation) is an educational trust set up to promote, through education, better industrial relations in New Zealand.
The NZ Relay app is free to download from the App Store and Google Play Store and uses mobile data or a Wi-Fi connection.
The NZ Relay range of services is provided by the Crown for people with communications disabilities. MBIE funds NZ Relay to provide equal work and lifestyle opportunities for those with speech, hearing and vision disabilities. These services assist people who are Deaf, hard of hearing, speech-impaired and deafblind to communicate with others over the phone, with the help of a relay assistant.
The NZCT Fund makes funding available to organisations who manage Great Rides for:
The NZDF uses space-based assets to enable the efficient and effective performance of its core functions. This is done in close co-operation with partner militaries.
The NZIC ensures national security interests are reflected in space policies and supports the safe development of the space sector.
The NZIC includes the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, Government Communications Security Bureau (GCSB), and New Zealand Security Intelligence Service (NZSIS). Under the Outer Space and High-altitude Activities Act 2017, the NZSIS and the GCSB undertake national security risk assessments as part of the regulatory process.
The NZRIS database will provide data about funded research in New Zealand. Access to the database will be open to everyone; students, members of the public, media, government, businesses, and of course, the research community itself.
The NZSPG Review Report (April 2015) assessed whether the NZSPG operated as expected one year after its introduction, in support of the intended economic, industry development and cultural objectives.
The National Construction Pipeline Report provides 6-year projection of national building and construction work.
The National Construction Pipeline Report provides the sector with a 6-year projection of national building and construction work.
The National Science Challenges were established in 2014 and aim to tackle the biggest science-based issues and opportunities facing New Zealand.
The National Statement of Science Investment (2015) sets the vision for comprehensive evaluation and monitoring of sector performance.
The New Zealand Business Number
The New Zealand Cycle Trail Fund makes available up to $8 million annually for the maintenance, development and promotion of the New Zealand Cycle Trails (NZCT). The funding comes from the International Conservation and Visitor Levy.
The New Zealand Cycle Trails network is made up of the:
The New Zealand Food Innovation Network provides food development facilities to help businesses develop, test and prove new products, and trial new equipment.
The New Zealand Food Innovation Network website has detailed information on the services provided by the facilities, including case studies of completed projects.
The New Zealand Food Safety Science and Research Centre promotes, coordinates and delivers food safety science and research for New Zealand.
The New Zealand Government invests around $1.8b a year in research activities which are undertaken by many different organisations and institutions.
The New Zealand Government signed a memorandum of understanding with Amazon and its
The New Zealand Growth Capital Partners (NZGCP) is a Crown entity company that invests into seed and venture capital funds. It partners with angel investor groups to drive investment into vibrant early stage New Zealand companies with high-growth potential and through fund of funds management to invest into venture capital firms.
The New Zealand Institute for Plant & Food Research Limited
The New Zealand Labour Market Dashboard displays labour market information from many different sources in one place.
The New Zealand Refugee Resettlement Strategy was developed and implemented in 2013 with the aim of improving outcomes for former refugees.
The New Zealand Refugee Resettlement Strategy was developed and implemented in 2013 with the aim of improving outcomes for former refugees. The overarching aim of the strategy is to ensure that:
The New Zealand Registered Architects Board regulates the architecture profession. It is responsible for developing and adminstrating rules about competency standards, ethics, complaints and discipline of members of the profession.
The New Zealand Research Information System (NZRIS) will be a freely available national, online database containing information about the research, science and innovation sector.
The New Zealand Screen Production Rebate is a government initiative to grow the sustainability and economic benefits of our screen sector in a dynamic global environment.
The New Zealand Sectors Dashboard is a 1-stop shop for all information about New Zealand's economy by sectors. We update it about 4 times a year.
The New Zealand Sectors Report Series is a set of 7 publications that provides a factual source of information on the key sectors that make up the New Zealand economy. This 2013 tourism report took an in-depth look into how our tourism sector was performing.
The New Zealand Space Agency (NZSA) at the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) is the only New Zealand entity permitted to submit internship candidates for consideration by NASA. Candidates do not apply directly to NASA.
The New Zealand Space Agency (NZSA) sits within MBIE and leads on:
The New Zealand Space Agency is the front door for space activity in New Zealand
The New Zealand Space Agency issues permits and licences for payloads, launch activities, launch facilities, and high-altitude vehicles.
The New Zealand Space Agency offers an internship in partnership with the NASA Jet Propulsion Lab (JPL) via our scholarships programme. The scholarship aims to support New Zealand students in space related activities.
The New Zealand Space Agency provides guidance about the information that is needed for certain licenced or permitted activities.
The New Zealand Space and Advanced Aviation Strategy sets out the steps the government is taking to support the development of our space and advanced aviation sectors and supporting principles for our wider space interests.
The New Zealand Telecommunications Forum sets minimum standards for emergency call services through its industry code of practice, the Emergency Calling Code.
The New Zealand Tourism Futures Taskforce is a public private partnership to lead the thinking on the future of tourism in New Zealand. MBIE provides Secretariat services to the Taskforce.
The New Zealand Tourism Futures Taskforce is an independent public private partnership to lead the thinking on the future of tourism in New Zealand. MBIE provides Secretariat services to the Taskforce.
The New Zealand screen industry brings a range of direct and indirect economic benefits to the sector and New Zealand's wider economy.
The New Zealand space industry is taking off in a massive way, but to be the brightest star in the NZ$647 billion global space economy we need skilled workers.
The New Zealand-Aotearoa Government Tourism Strategy is more important than ever as we welcome visitors back to New Zealand. The Strategy sets out a more deliberate and active role for government in tourism.
The New Zealand-European Union Free Trade Agreement (2024)
The New Zealand-Hong Kong, China Closer Economic Partnership (2010)
The Office of the Privacy Commissioner
The Official Information Act 1982 (OIA) helps New Zealand Citizens, permanent residents and anyone in New Zealand access information held by government organisations and Ministers. This promotes openness and transparency and enables greater public participation in government.
The Older Workers Employment Action Plan acts as a blueprint on how the Government can help support and encourage older people to stay in the workforce if they want or need to.
The Ombudsman can consider complaints about the administrative acts and decisions of state sector agencies. The Ombudsman will ask you if you have tried to resolve the matter with us directly first and will also consider whether you have any other remedy available. The Ombudsman may look into your complaint and make a recommendation to us regarding the concern you have raised.
The Operating Model to put the principles of the Joint ENZ-INZ Joint Enforcement Strategy into practice will be delivered.
The Oranga Tamariki Act 1989 and the Privacy Act 1993, allows information to be shared, so as to keep children safe when child abuse or neglect is reported or investigated. Given the sensitivity of this information, appropriate precautions shall be taken including when using, disclosing, and storing the information, including taking care not to discuss it openly.
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) produces voluntary guidelines and recommendations on responsible, sustainable multi-national business conduct.
The Our Future Services programme has customers at the heart of its design. Simpler, faster and more user-friendly application processes to reduce waiting times, clear communication on application status, and increased self-service capabilities will ensure our customers feel informed and supported.
The Our Future Services programme will deliver a more cost-effective immigration system that is
The Our Future Services programme will deliver a more cost-effective immigration system that is more productive, more effective at managing immigration risk, and provides a better experience for our customers and staff.
The Outer Space and High -altitude Activities Act 2017 Regulations
The Outer Space and High-altitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulations 2017 (the Regulations) set out the requirements for various licences and permits.
The Outer Space and High-altitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulations Act 2017 governs payload permit applications.
The Outer Space and High-altitude Activities Act 2017
The Outer Space and High-altitude Activities Act 2017 (the Act) regulates launches into outer space, launch facilities, high-altitude vehicles (HAVs), and payloads. It is administered by the New Zealand Space Agency within the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment.
The Outer Space and High-altitude Activities Act 2017 governs the regulation of New Zealand space and high-altitude activities. MBIE (through its Space Regulatory Systems team) is the regulator, including for all payloads launched from New Zealand.
The PDF version of the full report can be found here:
The PDF version of the summary report can be found here:
The Pacific Employment Action Plan starts a conversation for all of us about what new opportunities Government can support for better employment outcomes for Pacific peoples. You can read more about it here.
The Panel Agreement for face to face interpreting is available to agencies within the public sector, including Public Service departments, non-Public Service departments (such as the New Zealand Police), Crown Entities, State-owned enterprises and local authorities.
The Parental Leave and Employment Protection Amendment Bill was passed to extend the duration of paid parental leave to 26 weeks.
The Plan of Action provides a high-level framework for the actions that government agencies will undertake over 5 years to 2025 to contribute to eliminating forced labour, people trafficking and slavery.
The Plan of Action structures government actions into 3 broad pillars:
The Plumbers, Gasfitters and Drainlayers Board (the Board) is established to administer the Act. The Board is a statutory entity and therefore is responsible to Parliament. The Board exists independently of MBIE.
The Plumbers, Gasfitters and Drainlayers Board has more information for prospective Certification Authorities on its website.
The Plumbers, Gasfitters and Drainlayers Board is responsible for administering the registration and licensing systems of plumbers, gasfitters and drainlayers.
The Plumbers, Gasfitters and Drainlayers Board is the regulator of the self-contained vehicle system. See their website for information on what is needed to certify your vehicle, and where to go to get certified and information for organisations looking to become certification authorities.
The Postal Services Act 1998 removed New Zealand Post Ltd's monopoly to carry standard letters.
The Postal Services Act imposes a number of obligations on postal operators. By law, they must:
The Privacy Act 2020 applies to submissions and survey responses. Any personal information you supply to us in making a submission will only be used for the purpose of assisting in the development of policy advice for this review of Schedule 2. Clearly indicate if you do not wish for your name, or any other personal information, to be included in the summary of submissions document that we may publish.
The Procurement Project is in the process of establishing new service delivery models for key services to be provided across government, such as the new Telephone and Video Interpreting Service for the government and a panel of organisations who provide face to face interpreting and translation services across the public sector.
The Programme is being designed in consultation with key stakeholders and sector representatives. Design is expected to be completed in late 2022.
The Programme will provide funding for projects that deliver on one or more of the following outcomes:
The Prosecution policy aligns with the following MBIE guiding principles:
The Provincial Growth Fund has invested in projects which:
The Public sector financial resource code sets spreadsheet contains information from Treasury on code-sets used for appropriations.
The R&D Tax Incentive helps businesses innovate and contribute to a stronger, more productive economy that benefits all New Zealanders.
The RBI build has occurred in 2 phases.
The REPF is available to events which will deliver a high return on investment and increase the likelihood of encouraging visitors to explore New Zealand beyond the key tourism locations. The intention of the funding is to augment the planned promotion of the event i.e. to provide up to 50% of additional funding to enhance the existing promotional budget for the event.
The RSE policy supports New Zealand employers to fill labour shortages in seasonal roles where New Zealanders are not available, while maximising benefits for Pacific workers and countries through the ability to earn money here, learn new skills and increase remittances.
The RTBF is open to groups of collaborating organisations led by an RTO. The lead RTO will submit the application, be the contracted party, and be responsible for delivery of the project.
The Regional Business Partners Network (RBPN) received $10 million for supporting small-medium tourism businesses impacted by COVID-19 to get expert advice. Eligible businesses will receive vouchers of up to $5,000 to access advice and expertise to support business continuity.
The Regional Economic Activity web tool, mobile app and summary reports are regularly updated with new data as it becomes available from source providers.
The Regional Economic Activity web tool, mobile apps and reports are tools to explore information and data on New Zealand's regions.
The Regional Events Promotion Fund (REPF) provides $5 million over 2 years to support the promotion of regional events to the domestic market. The fund is contestable and aims to encourage regional dispersal and increase visitor spend in the regions with an additional focus on encouraging seasonal dispersal by promoting events outside of the peak summer season.
The Regional Mid-sized Tourism Facilities Grant Fund was set up to fund projects in regions experiencing infrastructure pressure (eg, car parks and toilets) due to an increase in visitors.
The Regional Research Institute (RRI) initiative established new, independently governed, private or private not-for-profit regional research institutes.
The Regional Strategic Partnership Fund
The Regional Tourism Boost Fund (RTBF) is a contestable fund which provides $3 million to support regions to attract more international visitors and encourage dispersal of international visitors around the country.
The Registered Architects Act 2005 protects the titles of Registered Architect and Architect. Only persons registered with the New Zealand Registered Architects Board (NZRAB) may use words, initials, or abbreviations of the title Registered Architect, or describe themselves as an Architect in the context of offering or providing building design services.
The Regulations also prescribe a levy of $120 dollars that vehicle owners will have to pay each time their vehicle is certified or recertified (every 4 years). The levy covers the cost of regulating the new self-containment certification system.
The Regulations in their severed form retain the high-level service description and maximum prices for the anchor broadband and voice and DFAS services that Chorus is required to offer. The following provisions of the initial Regulations have been removed:
The Regulations prescribe the requirements for an O rbital Debris Mitigation Plan. The relevant regulation is:
The Regulations prescribe the requirements for an ODMP for the purpose of the above sections. The relevant regulation is:
The Regulations were due to commence on 12 November 2021. However, on 9 September 2021 the Government agreed to delay the commencement of the Regulations by 3 months. This will give businesses more time to prepare for the Regulations, recognising the significant disruption caused by the re-emergence of COVID-19 in the community.
The Regulations were the subject of High Court proceedings under the Judicial Review Procedure Act 2016 in 2021-2022. In December 2022, the High Court found certain aspects of the Regulations relating to material incorporated by reference to be unlawful. This has resulted in an order to sever the offending aspects of the Regulations [Chorus Ltd v Minister for the Digital Economy and Communications [2023] NZHC 662 refers].
The Regulations will now commence on 12 February 2022 and do not apply to frozen foods until 12 May 2023.
The Regulatory Systems (Economic Development) Amendment Bill amends 24 Acts and related regulations
The Regulatory Systems (Immigration and Workforce) Amendment Bill amends 7 Acts and related regulations.
The Regulatory Systems Amendment Bill (No 1) was introduced on 12 October 2016 and passed on 23 March 2017. The RSAB No 1 package comprised:
The Regulatory Systems Amendment Bill (No 2) was introduced on 12 December 2018 and passed on 7 November 2019. The RSAB No 2 package comprised:
The Remote Users Scheme was launched in November 2022.
The Remuneration Authority is also required to consider the value of the personal benefit arising out of entitlements when setting MPs' salaries.
The Report is presented in four parts:
The Research Science and Innovation (RSI) System Performance Report is a snapshot of how the New Zealand science and innovation system is performing in major areas. It covers people, skills, knowledge, infrastructure and funding across government, as well as education and business.
The Research Science and Innovation System Performance Report provides a snapshot of how the New Zealand science and innovation system is performing in major areas. It covers: people; skills; knowledge; infrastructure and funding across government; education and business.
The Research, Science and Innovation Domain Plan puts forward a:
The Research, Science and Innovation Report
The Reserve Bank of New Zealand
The Residential Tenancies Act (RTA) was amended in June 2016 to improve tenancy law.
The Resource Management (National Environmental Standards for Telecommunications Facilities) Regulations 2016 (NESTF) came into effect on 1 January 2017, replacing the previous 2008 regulations.
The Review is the first of three key stages to improve how seismic risk is managed in existing buildings. The three stages and their estimated timeframes are shown below. We are currently at Stage 1.
The Review of the Act will consider: • The operation and effectiveness of the Act, since the Act came into force on 21 December 2017; • Whether the provisions of the Act should be retained or repealed; and • Whether any further amendments to the Act are necessary or desirable.
The Review recommends that the SPRS team discusses with PCO how the change in control provision in section 53(1)(b) can be improved . A possible option is that this section of the Act be revised to expressly provide that: • If the licensee or permit holder is a body corporate, that they must inform the Minister before they undergo a change of control and apply for a transfer or change of control; • If the Minister has not approved a change of control at the time the change of control occurs then any licences or permits the licensee holds will be suspended until the change of control is approved; and • If the Minister declines the change of control, then the licence will be revoked. • Licence holders are required to take “all practi cal steps” to ensure the Minister makes a determination on the change of control prior to it occurring. The Review notes that when assessing a change of control application, the Minister will need to assess whether the threshold tests in the Act will cont inue to be satisfied. This is a necessarily implication from the overall scheme of the legislation and the Review Team is not convinced, that the threshold tests need to be replicated in this or other sections, such as the variation provision. However, it is recommend ed that there be a discussion with PCO at the time the legislation is amended about whether there is a need to spell this out more clearly on the face of the application. Currently , when an application is ‘accepted’ is not defined in the Act or regulations. The Act also currently does not provide the power to reject an application. Space, Policy and Regulatory Team (MBIE) As there is no statutory power to reject an application, those that do not meet the standard are left in a suspended state, neither unable to proceed nor be finalised by way of a rejection. MBIE’s submission to the Review on this issue presented two poten tial avenues for how this matter might be addressed or managed, which were: • Establishing a criterion for when an application may be accepted. This may be through operational policy, rather than the Act itself. As a matter of practice, where an application is incomplete, MBIE works with operators to assist them in ensuring complete information is provided. While legislative options were considered, the Review concludes that the current statutory settings should be retained. The incomplete applications matter is best managed administratively by working with applicants to help them complete the application and providing guidance on wha t information is required to enable an application to be assessed .
The Royal Commission made 189 recommendations that were accepted, accepted in principle or noted by the Government.
The Royal Commission of Inquiry into the terrorist attacks on Christchurch mosques published its report on 8 December 2020.
The Royal Commission on Pike River
The Royal Commission on the Pike River Coal Mine Tragedy and the Independent Taskforce on Workplace Health and Safety recommended changes to health and safety at work.
The Royal Society of New Zealand
The Rural Broadband Initiative contracts between the Ministry, Chorus (previously part of Telecom) and Vodafone were signed on 20 April 2011. Agreements were signed with Chorus and Network Tasman to deploy fibre to:
The SSAG report informed government decisions on refocusing the science, innovation and technology system.
The Sapere Research Group carried out an independent evaluation of the New Zealand Screen Production Grant in 2017. The evaluation assessed the grant's economic and cultural impacts and its role in the development of the industry.
The Scheme has been established to support New Zealand travel agents and wholesalers to obtain refunds and credits for cancelled travel on behalf of their customers. Consumers are not able to apply directly to the Scheme.
The Scheme is also available in rural areas where internet download speeds are very slow and the household is not covered by any other government connectivity programme.
The Scheme is funded up to a maximum of $47.2 million, to 31 December 2021. Participating travel agencies and wholesalers will be reimbursed for:
The Scheme supports the recovery of refunds and credits owed to New Zealand consumers by overseas travel suppliers.
The Science Board is responsible for making independent investment decisions on funding proposals for research, science and technology and related activities that are referred to them by our chief executive. This includes funding for the National Science Challenges.
The Science System Advisory Group (SSAG) is chaired by Professor Sir Peter Gluckman and made up of 8 additional members from a range of backgrounds.
The Science System Advisory Group was convened by MBIE to provide advice on strengthening the science, innovation and technology system, including the challenges and aspirations of the sector, and opportunities for growth.
The Scope of Space Policy and a Lead Space Agency [PDF 629KB]
The Screen Industry Workers Act 2022 comes into force on 30 December 2022. These are the key aspects of the new law:
The Screen Industry Workers Act provides proposes a new model, developed by industry and supported by Government, to allow screen industry contractors to bargain collectively. The Act comes into force on 30 December 2022.
The Sector level of the SEO classification has been removed to streamline the classification. The original Environment division has been divided into two more focussed Divisions (Environmental management and Environmental policy, climate change and natural hazards) in the new SEO classification, also in line with advice from researchers and users of the classification.
The Sectors Reports Series and the New Zealand Sectors Dashboard provides up-to-date information on all the industry sectors that make up the New Zealand economy.
The Select Committee tabled their final report in the week of 20 March 2023:
The Shop Trading Hours Act 1990 was amended in 2016 to enable territorial authorities to decide whether retailers in their districts can open on Easter Sunday.
The Situation and Outlook for Primary Industries:
The Space Policy Review: National Space Policy Cabinet paper is available here.
The Space and Advanced Aviation Strategy sets five objectives to support doubling of the size of the space and advanced aviation sectors by 2030. These objectives will help us to leverage opportunities and address barriers to growth, building on our existing strengths and supporting the development of new capabilities that will help to grow our economy and address challenges New Zealand is facing.
The Sports nutrition and weight management industry has shown solid, long-term growth, the industry is surprisingly resilient, like cosmetics, to the economic cycle.
The Standards Project identified and implemented a new standards and certification framework for language practitioners working in the public sector. The framework developed by the National Australian Authority for Translators and Interpreters (NAATI) was chosen in 2018 for adoption in New Zealand. From 1 July 2024, interpreters wishing to work in the public sector will need to be NAATI-credentialed under the NAATI Certification System or be working towards achieving their credential.
The Standards are performance-based, which provides for flexibility in meeting the requirements, particularly compared with the prescriptive requirements in the voluntary standard.
The Startup Advisors Council is made up of industry leaders who have a deep understanding of startups, capital markets and are aware of international trends. They come from a range of backgrounds and have extensive experience in investment and growth of startup firms.
The Startup Advisors Council was formed in May 2022 for a 12-month term. They provide advice to the Ministers of Economic Development and Research, Science and Innovation on how to best support a thriving environment for startups in New Zealand. This includes recommendations for co-ordinated and targeted actions to enable more startups to be created and scaled up, and to accelerate the growth and maturity of New Zealand's startup ecosystem.
The Statement of Economic Policy from the Minister for Communications to the Commerce Commission in relation to incentives for businesses to invest in ultra-fast broadband infrastructure:
The Strategic Tourism Assets Protection Programme (STAPP) was intended to protect the assets in the tourism landscape that form the core of our essential tourism offerings to ensure their survival through the disruption caused by COVID-19. The programme also considered assets that are culturally and historically significant.
The Strategy has a strong commitment to embrace a holistic approach to sustainably growing the visitor economy, looking at all the elements that contribute to the overall visitor experience and having these at the centre of positioning Southland as a sought-after travel destination.
The Strategy was updated in 2022. Minor changes were made to ensure a more enduring framework with greater emphasis on implementation and monitoring.
The Summit offers a series of activities, including live plenary lectures, panel discussions, Q&A sessions, and networking platforms. Participants will also stand a chance to:
The Support for Energy Education in Communities (SEEC) Programme is part of a suite of government initiatives to lift people out of energy hardship.
The TDPF is available to support projects which will deliver core data, that are either national solutions, and/or can be nationally replicable or scalable. Proposed projects should fill data gaps, provide greater accessibility and use of data to enable better sector decision making. Projects should be responsive to sector needs, include innovation where possible, and support the goals and objectives set out in the Strategic business plan.
The TECTs are an interim replacement to the Monthly Regional tourism Estimates (MRTEs) to understand tourism spend activity in New Zealand.
The TSA adds another strand to our close and long-standing relationship with the US, and opens the door for US space businesses to consider New Zealand as a business location.
The Takeovers Code aims to ensure transparency and equitable processes for control-change transactions in the shares of companies it covers.
The Takeovers Panel is an independent Crown agency that regulates changes in the control of widely-held New Zealand companies. It does this through the enforcement of the Takeovers Code. The Panel's aim is to ensure all shareholders can participate in control-change transactions in a fair and informed manner. It also promotes public understanding of takeovers law and practice and recommends any necessary changes.
The Taskforce intended the audit requirement to be an incentive for employer s to ensure an employee’s guaranteed hours set out in their employment agreement are an accurate reflection of their actual hours of work. I do not consider the Holidays Act or Bill is the appropriate mechanism through which to create such an incentive. • Rescind the decision to introduce an audit requirement so that where an employee has guaranteed hours of work AL calcul ation s will be based on their guaranteed hours of work.
The Taskforce is a independent public-private partnership led by two co-chairs and supported and informed by an Advisory Group.
The Taskforce recom mends an improved status quo 17. The Taskforce submitted its final report to me on 8 October 2019 (attached as Annex Two). The proposed approach is an improved status quo, where the existing units of entitlement are retained (weeks for annual holidays, days fo r FBAPS1 leave) and the focus is on addressing known issues with the existing Act. The recommendations were made unanimously.
The Taskforce undertook its review in three distinct phases 13. Between July 2018 and October 2019, the full Taskforce met for 17 meetings and the Taskforce subcommittee met for 13 meetings. The Taskforce undertook its review in three distinct phases:
The Taskforce was asked to make recommendations on options for a clear and transparent set of rules for providing entitlements to, and payment for, holidays and leave.
The Taskforce was to consider: a. options to improve both the provision of, and payment for, entitlements that meet the objectives above and: i. where t rade- offs between competing objectives are required, it was to be explicit about how tho se were made ii. was given scope to include consideration of the place of the standard five day, 40 hour, working week in the Act b. any other matters relating to the Act that it s aw fit. Th at could include holidays and leave entitlements modified by other Acts (such as the Parental Leave and Employment Protection Act 1987). The Taskforce was given scope to reconsider the two key principles of the Act but options were to aim to preserve the intent of th ose as far as possible: a. that entitlements are determined in relation to the work pattern at the time the leave is taken b. that employees should not be financially disadvantaged by taking leave, that i s, they should be paid (at least) what they would have earned had they worked. The Taskforce was not to consider the complex issue of remediation of historical underpayments of holiday and leave pay .
The Taskforce will also make recommendations to address the long-standing productivity, inclusivity and sustainability (environmental, social and economic) issues present in some parts of the tourism sector.
The Taskforce will be responsible for decision-making and recommendations, and the Advisory Group will be used to test solutions and provide information to support the Taskforce.
The Taskforce will provide an initial report on the future of tourism in New Zealand in December 2020, with final recommendations and steps for implementation in April 2021.
The Taskforce’s Terms of Reference set out that Cabinet expected it to develop, test and make recommendations to the Government on policy options for the provision of, and payment for, holiday and leave entitlements that: a. continue to promote the existing purpose of the Holidays Act 2003 b. provide clarity and certainty for employers and employees so that employees receive their correct entitlements c. be simpler than the current Act in relation to the provision of, and payment for, entitlements to holidays and leave d. be readily implementable in a payroll system e. minimise compliance costs for employers f. minimise perverse incentives on employers and employ ees g. ensure the balance of decision- making between employers and employees when it comes to requests for holidays and leave is appropriately calibrated h. be readily applicable to the full range of working and remuneration arrangements in the labour market both now and in the future i. aim to protect overall entitlements for employees.
The Taxation (Research and Development Tax Credits) Bill
The Team also has policy responsibilities in relation to a range of international labour issues, including: modern slavery and the Worker Protection (Migrant and other Employees) Act.
The TechHub is a shared multi-use facility for participants of the programme and members of the Tologa Bay community. The programme offers tech literacy, digital marketing and e-commerce training to participants and members of the wider community.
The Technical Advisory Group
The Technical Advisory Group has sector-wide representation. The purpose of the group is to act as a sounding board for NZRIS-related technical matters and inform delivery of the IT system. It also serves as a vehicle for sector-wide issues and concerns to be defined and raised with MBIE.
The Technical Advisory Group provides technical advice to MBIE on up-to-date gene technology regulation, including regulatory procedures and scientific technical matters related to biotechnology, genetic technologies and gene therapies.
The Technology Safeguards Agreement (TSA)
The Technology Safeguards Agreement Side Arrangement
The Telecommunications (Property Access and Other Matters) Amendment Act makes it easier for people to connect to Ultra-Fast Broadband (UFB) in cases involving shared property. It introduced a new, simplified consenting process that telecommunications companies must follow when installing modern networks like UFB, where the consent of more than one party is required.
The Telecommunications (Property Access) Regulations 2017 set the fibre installation methods and requirements that fall under each category, as well as other details to give effect to the property access regime.
The Telecommunications (Regulated Fibre Services) Regulations 2021 were initially made on 13 September 2021 and took effect from 1 January 2022. They were further revised as of 29 March 2023. The Regulations specify anchor broadband and voice services and one direct fibre access service (DFAS) that Chorus must provide to retail service providers (RSPs).
The Telecommunications Act 2001 includes a regulatory framework for fibre connection.
The Telecommunications Development Levy (TDL) is collected from telecommunications service providers each year.
The Telecommunications Development Levy subsidises telecommunications capabilities in the public interest which are otherwise not expected to be available commercially, or which are unaffordable.
The Telecommunications Development Levy subsidises telecommunications capabilities in the public interest.
The Telephone and Video Interpreting Services Panel has now been established. The selected providers are:
The Terms of Reference (ToR) sets out the scope and process for the review:
The Tiaki Promise is a commitment to care for Aotearoa, for now and future generations. It has a set of guiding principles for visitors to follow, showing them how to contribute to preserving and protecting our land. These principles include protecting nature, keeping New Zealand clean, being prepared, driving carefully, and showing respect.
The Tiaki website provides practical examples of how visitors can exercise Tiaki. For example, to protect nature, visitors should:
The Tourism Communities: Support, Recovery and Re-set Plan also advances a nationwide re-set in the tourism sector. Initiatives focus on ensuring tourism will be more sustainable and resilient in the future.
The Tourism Communities: Support, Recovery and Re-set Plan targets 5 New Zealand communities and the businesses that are part of those communities.
The Tourism Data Domain Plan sets out the main priorities for tourism statistics, based on agreement by industry and government stakeholders.
The Tourism Data Leadership Group (TDLG) was established to facilitate the provision of consistent, reliable, and trusted tourism data and insights that enables improved understanding to support better decision making, long-term value gains and sustainability for the benefit of all New Zealanders.
The Tourism Data Partnership Fund (TDPF) is a $400,000 contestable fund available in 2024/25 only, to identified tourism industry bodies.
The Tourism Data Partnership Fund is open to the following tourism sector industry bodies:
The Tourism Growth Partnership and Regional Mid-sized Tourism Facilities Grant Fund closed in 2017. Remaining funds were rolled into the Tourism Infrastructure Fund.
The Tourism Growth Partnership was set up to fund industry-led commercial projects focused on increasing productivity across the tourism sector.
The Tourism Growth Partnership was set up to fund industry-led commercial projects focused on increasing productivity across the tourism sector. Between 2013 and 2017, 40 projects received $23.4 million in funding.
The Tourism ITP took a phased approach
The Tourism ITP will be a government partnership with tourism businesses and members of the tourism workforce, iwi, researchers and independent advisers. The Tourism ITP will build on recent work by the Parliamentary Commissioner for the Environment, Tourism Futures Taskforce and Climate Change Commission, among others, to transform tourism in New Zealand to a more sustainable model.
The Tourism Information and Data Hui
The Tourism Infrastructure Fund (TIF) provided up to $25 million annually to develop tourism-related infrastructure that supports regions facing pressure from tourism growth.
The Tourism Infrastructure Fund is now open for applications from councils to address infrastructure needs related to tourism.
The Tourism Infrastructure Fund was introduced to develop tourism-related infrastructure and support local communities facing pressure from tourism growth, for example areas with higher visitor numbers but small ratepayer bases.
The Tourism Satellite Account report presents information on tourism's contribution to the New Zealand economy in terms of expenditure and employment.
The Tourism Transitions Programme was established to provide support and advice to tourism businesses that have been impacted by COVID-19. It includes three key programmes of work:
The Trafficking in Persons Inter-Agency Operations Group continues to meet monthly to discuss investigations into cases with elements of people trafficking.
The Trafficking in Persons Inter-Agency Operations Group has implemented a standardised approach to recording suspected cases of people trafficking.
The Trans-Tasman patent attorney register records the names of persons and companies who may provide patent-related services in Australia and New Zealand.
The Trans-Tasman patent attorney registration regime
The Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, Including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies (the Outer Space Treaty), which was ratified by New Zealand in 1968.
The Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies (also known as the Outer Space Treaty), ratified by New Zealand in 1968;
The Tripartite Working Group provided its report in December 2021. Its recommended priority for reform was establishing a stronger distinction between employment and self-employment status in law. It recommended that policy work be undertaken to support consultation on a more detailed proposal.
The Tripartite Working Group recommended that a more detailed policy proposal based on its recommendations be developed and consulted on.
The UFB build is occurring in phases, with the nationwide rollout being completed by the end of 2022.
The Ultra-Fast Broadband (UFB) programme is one of the largest and most ambitious infrastructure projects ever undertaken in New Zealand. It will see around 87% of New Zealanders, in over 390 towns and cities, able to access fibre by the end of 2022.
The Ultra-Fast Broadband Programme, Rural Broadband Initiative and Mobile Black Spot Fund are together delivering improved broadband services and mobile coverage throughout New Zealand.
The University of Canterbury Aerospace Club is a student-led club sponsored by the
The University of Canterbury Aerospace Club is a student-led club supported by the University Of Canterbury Department Of Mechanical Engineering.
The Worker Protection (Migrant and Other Employees) Bill was introduced in September and is being considered by Select Committee. Public submissions on the Bill closed on 1 December.
The Working Group provided its recommendations to the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety in December 2018.
The Working Matters Dashboard: March 2021 [PDF 369KB]
The Working Matters Dashboard: October 2021 [PDF 523KB]
The Youth Employment Action Plan monitoring and reporting dashboard
The Youth Employment Action Plan sets out a programme of actions for government agencies to improve education, training and employment outcomes for young people.
The Youth Employment Action Plan sets out a programme of actions for government agencies to improve education, training and employment outcomes.
The action plan has been designed to provide space to develop innovative, commercial opportunities both within existing projects and through new partnership opportunities.
The actions in the Action Plan are split into immediate actions, medium-term actions and long-term actions.
The adoption of over 40 national or trans-national level circular economy strategies worldwide, including 33 national circular economy roadmaps in Europe.
The adventure activities regulatory regime
The agreed approach does not fully resolve these issues and will add administrative burden and cost. Proposals agreed by the previous Minister to provide clarity are complex. We propose a
The aim of interpreting services is to ensure that everyone in New Zealand has equal access to government agencies and their services regardless of their level of English proficiency.
The aim of the APO is to:
The aim of the New Zealand Migrant Settlement and Integration Strategy (the Strategy) is to help migrants successfully settle and integrate by participating fully and contributing to all aspects of life in New Zealand. The success of the Strategy is measured across 5 outcome areas through 16 high-level indicators. This report shares findings on 7 of the 16 indicators where sufficient data is available for Pacific migrants. The primary source of this data was from the 2016 Migrant Survey.
The aim of the workshop was to define how best to establish an exceptional food safety science and research centre to ensure New Zealand remains a leader internationally in the food safety field.
The aims of the CORS Pilot were to:
The all-of-government plan of action against forced labour, people trafficking and slavery sets out a high-level framework for the actions that agencies will take over the next five years to 2025, to combat these practices.
The amendment also presents an opportunity to better support the objectives of I nland Revenue ’s (IR’s) online application system to make applications faster and easier for applicants and employers. The system includes a calculated income estimate which was intended to remove the responsibility for making the complex payment calculations from applicants and employers.
The annual cap of workers is currently 19,500 for the 2023/24 season.
The applicant’s ability to carry out an activity without compromising the safety of the public is paramount – planning for public safety needs to be integrated into business planning. Personnel and Resources Having the right people with the right capabilities and tools is critical to achieving good public safety outcomes. Applicants should clearly demonstrate that they understand the resources required to ensure public safety objectives are not compromised. To demonstrate that public safety outcomes are able to be achieved, applicants must show that they understand: ȓ what tasks must be performed throughout the ȓ how training and competency is managed effectively operations to ensure public safety; throughout the operation; ȓ what resources are required to perform those tasks; ȓ how requirements are communicated; and ȓ the level of expertise required to perform ȓ how you can or will recover, in the event something those tasks; does go wrong, to prevent something from becoming more serious.ȓ who is responsible for ensuring that tasks are performed and that they are suitably qualified to do so; If contractors are being used, the applicant must have suitable systems in place to communicate with them and ensure that any public safety risk is well managed. Identification and Management of Risks There should be a strong focus on managing the risks (rather than a focus on what the activities are) and an emphasis on prevention rather than reaction. Applicants must demonstrate that they understand the hazards and risks throughout the operations and how these could threaten public safety. The management systems should be built in such a way that these risks can be controlled. Applicants should focus on managing the risks that have major or significant consequences even if they would be infrequent. The management of the public safety risk will need to be proportionate to the scale of that risk i.e. risks with significant public safety consequences will require more effort and resources to determine the best way to eliminate the risk, or where not practicable to eliminate, to minimise the risk. Applicants should: ȓ consider all possible options to control a risk; ȓ select the most effective control that is reasonably practicable to implement. 5
The application form explains the information you need to provide. Anyone applying for this licence must meet requirements in the Regulations, specifically those in Schedule 2 and Schedule 3 (links are below). Some requirements may be at least partially met with foreign authorisations.
The application form explains the information you need to provide. Anyone applying for this licence must meet requirements in the Regulations, specifically those in Schedule 2 and Schedule 5 (links are below). Some requirements may be at least partially met with foreign authorisations.
The application form explains the information you need to provide. Anyone applying for this licence must meet requirements in the Regulations, specifically those in Schedule 2 and Schedule 6 (links are below). Some requirements may be at least partially met with foreign authorisations.
The application form explains the information you need to provide. Anyone applying for this permit must meet requirements in the Regulations, specifically those in Schedule 2 and Schedule 4 (links are below). Some requirements may be at least partially met with foreign authorisations.
The application of this policy is intended to evolve to reflect the development of new technologies, c hanges in the satellite and broader space industry and the orbital debris environment. 1.5 Information to be taken into account when applying this policy Information to be taken into account in the application of this policy includes : For payloads that intend to carry out or demonstrate active debris removal or on -orbit servicing activities, the ODMP should include specific considerations for the activity being carried out. In addition to the requirements in the Operational Policy on Orbital Debris Mitig ation Plans , these missions will be required to comply with the Consortium for Execution of Rendezvous and Servicing Operations (CONFERS) “Guiding Principles for Commercial Rendezvous and Proximity Operations (RPO) and On -Orbit Servicing (OOS) ”. Other sta ndards and relevant documents for ADR and OOS missions recommended by NZSA include: + CONFERS Recommended Design and Operational Practices + CONFERS On -Orbit Servicing (OOS) Mission Phases + JERG -2-026 - JAXA Safety standards for OOS.
The aspects of the service descriptions that were contained in the material incorporated by reference into the Regulations have now been removed from the Regulations. However, similar obligations still exist in commercial agreements between Chorus and retail service providers.
The assessment of proposals for Endeavour 2025 funding round is performed by a considered selection of independent national and international Assessors from our virtual College of Assessors.
The below design principles will be followed when establishing the PROs:
The below summaries are for all payloads and other licences approved between 1 October and 31 December 2024.
The benefits (to New Zealand) of the proposed data being publicly available are identified.
The benefits of the New Zealand screen industry
The benefits of this additional creativity and innovation are considered to outweigh the costs imposed on society by intellectual property rights.
The best areas of opportunity were identified as:
The briefing is not government policy. However it will inform the future policy development of the 4 agencies who collaborated to develop the briefing, depending on discussion with and the priorities of the Government. It will also inform research and public discussion of the issues and opportunities.
The briefings process means the public can contribute to decision making, helping us collectively as a country to think about, and plan, for the future.
The cabinet papers that set out the policy decisions in relation to these regulations are:
The calculated income estimate is limited however, as IR does not have access to the level of detail about an employee’s pay that is required to calculate OWP in accordance with the Act and so instead estimates OWP based on a four -week average of taxable earnings. This requires affected employees or their employers to manually check the calculations . The OWP replacement agreed by Cabinet requires similar information about the components of an employee’s pay.
The calculation of importer margins was adjusted in September 2015 to include discounting activity. This adjustment has been carried back to October 2006.
The case for adding security guards to Schedule 1A of the Employment Relations Act [PDF 239KB]
The case studies are available online on the NZIER website and are included in the toolkit.
The case studies showcase and raise awareness of the existing regulatory cooperation practice and encourage regulators to think about the opportunities and options for future cooperation.
The centre is a virtual centre that will see the best scientists around the country collaborating on work programmes that cut across different food and beverage sectors.
The centre was launched in May 2016 in response to a recommendation from the Government Inquiry into the Whey Protein Concentrate Contamination Incident.
The centre's research aims to protect New Zealanders from food safety-related health threats, such as Salmonella, Campylobacter and other foodborne diseases.
The change proposal considered the specific functions and accountabilities held by MBIE's Senior Leadership Team and the impact on functional reporting lines for Tier 3 as well as the structure of business groups.
The change proposal focuses specifically on the future capabilities required to support both MBIE property and government property outcomes. Facilities management, as a contained service function for MBIE, is not within the scope of this proposal.
The changes are part of a wider Government initiative to combat all forms exploitation supported by $50m in funding over four years.
The changes proposed in th is paper do not address all the
The changes to hours of work law aim to retain flexibility where it is desired by both employers and employees. They also aim to increase certainty by ensuring that both the employer and the employee are clear about the mutual commitments they have made.
The changes will be phased in with a transition year in 2024 and changes formally starting to apply from 1 April 2025.
The charging station must be located along the Great Ride or an urban centre (within 5kms of the trail) that provides services for Great Ride users
The charging station must be primarily for cycle tourists using the Great Rides (Note: The fund is not intended to provide the e-bike charging facilities for commuters)
The circular economy also presents New Zealand with economic opportunities associated with a more resource-efficient and environmentally sustainable economy. Business opportunities based on our bioeconomy include production of high value wood products, native botanicals, essential oils, biocosmetics, marine bioactives, and farm inputs such as animal feed and fertilisers.
The closing date for submissions is
The company manufactures a suborbital spaceplane, 'Aurora', of which the Mk-II is an iteration. A spaceplane is an aircraft that takes off and lands conventionally but is capable of entering space.
The complaint will be dealt with in a fair, respectful, and impartial manner.
The complaint will be resolved in a timely manner.
The concept of N2O-based bi-propellant propulsion systems is not new. It has been around for a long time and extensively tested on the ground. The problem is that these engines are hard to get right and the thermal kinetics are a real pain.
The conformance infrastructure includes the regulations, institutions and arrangements for carrying out conformity assessments.
The consolidated calculation
The consultation approach
The contents of our social media accounts are intended for informational purposes only. We shall in no event accept any liability for loss or damage suffered by any person or body due to information provided on these sites or linked sites.
The contents of this website should not be construed as legal advice. Visitors to this website should take specific advice from qualified professionals before undertaking any action as a result of information accessed on this website.
The corporate governance system provides the legal infrastructure for the operation of businesses, not-for-profit entities and civil society organisations.
The cosmetic, toiletries and fragrances (CTF) industry has shown solid, strong, long-term growth, the industry is surprisingly resilient to the economic cycle. You would think that cosmetics, toiletries, and fragrances would be the first thing that people cut back on in an economic downturn, but it is really not the case and is surprisingly robust through time. The main outlier here is COVID where people were working from home.
The cost of discounting activity is borne by a range of parties. All other things being equal, this will tend to underestimate the importer margin attributable to oil companies.
The costs associated with the Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS) are provided by Envisory (formerly known as Hale & Twomey) based on the prevailing carbon price from the New Zealand Carbon Market.
The council will focus on:
The criteria that must all be met are:
The current New Zealand Energy Efficiency and Conservation Strategy 2017-2022 (NZEECS) sets the overarching policy direction for government support and intervention for promoting energy efficiency, energy conservation and the use of renewable sources of energy.
The current and previous dashboards are on the page below.
The current contract with Connecting Now ends on 31 March 2025.
The data in this report will provide insights into aspects of the infrastructure portfolio that are serving the system well, and areas where future system design should look to address gaps.
The data used to inform this review was obtained from 22 in-depth interviews with RBAs who had been deployed to the 2 weather events. In addition, all MBIE registered RBAs had the opportunity to participate in the review via an online survey, with 47 completed surveys received.
The date for a further round will be announced later this year.
The definition reflects the definition of technical data in the Technology Safeguards Agreement and is necessary to ensure New Zealand acts consistently with its international obligations under that agreement. No change is recommended.
The deployment schedule and coverage information for RBI2 is available on the National Broadband Map:
The details of each Cluster, including links to the current Work Programmes and details of the relevant New Zealand National Contact Point, are linked on the pages below.
The details of these reforms will be carefully worked through as part of the design and implementation of this change programme.
The development of digital connectivity infrastructure is a vital component of New Zealand's economic growth, productivity improvements and our wider strategy to increase our global competitiveness, particularly compared to other OECD countries.
The development of guidance documents and risk analysis frameworks
The diagram also shows that the approved codes of practice and guidance, standards, and information can be used in court as evidence of compliance.
The diagram consists of 4 squares. Starting at the top left and going clockwise, the content of the squares is:
The diagram shows that the Health and Safety at Work Act, regulations, and safe work instruments are mandatory.
The disability snapshot was added in the June 2024 quarter, and is an annual snapshot.
The discussion document consults on possible approaches to regulation, as well as other non-regulatory options that could support regulation.
The discussion document put forward a number of proposals, including:
The diversity data has been anonymised.
The diversity data we collect is anonymised, and used to inform a pathway to equity in the science system.
The document "Monitoring arrangements for MBIE-monitored Crown entities" outlines the accountability and performance framework in which Crown entities operate. Particular information relating to CRIs is included in Annex 7 of the document.
The documents below provide more information on these treaties.
The documents taken to Cabinet along with the Cabinet minute can be found below:
The easiest way to find a provider (or a shortlist of providers) is to start by deciding which language group you need and from there you can search by location.
The economic contribution of the screen industry
The effect has to occur after the cause (and if there is an expected delay between the cause and expected effect, then the effect must occur after that delay).
The effective use of knowledge, skills and capital in business is a major driver of innovation and growth. This increases wages, lifts business competitiveness and profitability, and leads to better social and economic outcomes. The interaction of skilled people and innovative businesses provides the greatest scope for economic growth between now and 2025.
The embedding of these insights will ensure that our work remains relevant and evidence-based, and that we continue to be an efficient and effective steward of the building regulatory system.
The employees have little bargaining power.
The employer must also continue to give the employee a copy of the collective employment agreement and if the employee agrees, inform the union as soon as practicable that the employee has entered into the individual employment agreement with the employer.
The enforcement tools available to disrupt exploitation and hold people to account, particularly through prosecution, are effectively used.
The essence of a digital twin lies in its ability to synchronise data between digital and physical realms. The fosters a 2 way data flow. It facilitates feedback mechanisms for effective interventions in the physical system."]
The essential oil firms, when we went and had a look, are located across New Zealand.
The estimated discount is calculated as the difference between the:
The estimates are best used as a tool to help understand the industrial makeup of these local economies, rather than as an annual monitoring tool. Given the proportionally large revisions that can occur in GDP estimates at the TA level, in part due to the relatively small numbers involved, they are not expected to serve as key performance indicators (KPIs) or targets for local governments or agencies.
The evaluation report provides a useful insight into the value and positive impacts of the screen sector to New Zealand. However, it also confirms the difficulties in calculating the net economic benefit arising from the grant.
The evaluation report was published in June 2018 together with 2 peer review reports:
The exposure draft Bill included:
The exposure draft will provide the opportunity to test the fairness, practicality and outcomes of this approach. Framework for paying AL as a regular part of an employees pay (pay -as- you-go (PAYG)) In 2020 Cabinet agreed to a new four -part test for determining when PAYG can be used because a work pattern is ‘interment and irregular .’ It also agreed to a recurring 13 -week review period to determine if the definition continues to be met and PAYG can continue . This was intended to address the high degree of discretion employees are required to exercise about whether PAYG can be used and the lack of a framework for reviewing its use during employment . These have both contributed to non - compliance. • Rescind the decision to introduce a four -part test for using PAYG and a mend the decision to require the use of PAYG to be reviewed on a 13 -week basis. • Authorise the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety to make decisions on the detail of replacement provisions for using PAYG that align with the following approach : o Provide simpler , objective criteria for using PAY G that provide certainty and remove the need for judgement . o Create less administrative burden than a recurring 13 -week review but still ensur e that an employee who receives PAYG does genuinely work on an intermittent basis and have periods away from work. 6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:12:15 I N C O N F I D E N C E 18 I N C O N F I D E N C E The recommended te st and 13-week review process lacked clarity in several areas and still required a high degree of judgement. Employers would have to make an assessment at the start of employment about what they expected the employee’s work pattern to be. During employment they would have to determine whether, within each 13 -week review period, ‘time at work had repeated in a manner possible to anticipate .' A 13-week review period would also impose high compliance costs on employers.
The extension aimed to support working families with newborns and young children and help reduce financial stress.
The fall in advertised job vacancies is easing, with online job advertisements falling by 21.7% over the year to the March 2025 quarter, following a fall of 27.2% over the year to the December 2024 quarter. Job advertisements have now been declining since December 2022 (10 consecutive quarters).
The fibre regulatory framework was introduced following a review conducted between 2013 and June 2017. The Telecommunications Act 2001 was then amended in November 2018 to create a new framework for the regulation of wholesale fibre services, which would replace the existing contracts for government programmes such as the Ultrafast Broadband (UFB) initiative. The framework is a wholesale level arrangement that provides stable and predictable regulation for fibre connectivity and removes regulation of copper lines where fibre is available.
The final New Zealand Consumer Survey 2022 closed in November 2022 with over 2,000 completed responses. Includes questions on whether the fair treatment of workers impacts on consumer purchases. Kantar Public is currently working on the analysis, with a final version to be released in February 2023.
The final report of the investigation into the electricity supply interruptions of 9 August 2021.
The final report on responses to the recommendations of the Royal Commission of Inquiry into Building Failure Caused by the Canterbury Earthquakes (the Royal Commission) was released on 13 February 2017.
The findings have supported work under the First Emissions Reduction Plan to assess how Aotearoa New Zealand could transition to a sustainable and high value bioeconomy.
The findings indicate that circular approaches have the potential to support significant emission savings over time, but that achieving this will take deliberate and sustained action. Other impacts of circular approaches reviewed in the research included greater productivity through more efficient use of physical resource inputs, new and changed jobs, and opportunities to mitigate supply chain risks.
The findings of the evaluation provide compelling evidence that New Zealand Cycle Trail Great Rides are having positive impact to New Zealand. Key findings are as follows:
The findings of the review have now been announced by Te Kawa Mataaho Public Service Commission.
The first balloon launched successfully on April 15 2023. The second balloon launched on May 13 2023, however the flight ended on May 14 2023 due to system failure.
The first consultation hui were in July/August 2021 and mainly targeted young people and those working closely with them, for example:
The first package of Fair Pay Agreements Regulations was published on 1 December 2022 and can be found on the New Zealand Legislation website. These regulations were repealed on 20 December 2023.
The first phase of the Tourism Industry Transformation Plan (ITP) focused on enabling Better Work for the tourism industry.
The first phase of this work is to sharpen the purpose of the Health and Safety at Work Act to manage critical risks and clarify the boundaries of the Act.
The focus for assessments is on system performance, not framework performance, and ensuring we treat systems as "living".
The focus is on improving the current maintenance and risk settings in the Building Code and educating users. A more consistent programme of updates allows for clear minimum performance requirements. The Building Code is moving to better support sector innovation and best practice.
The focus of our postal policy is to ensure the regulatory environment, including competition in postal services, supports an efficient postal market in New Zealand.
The follow-up survey to the 2022 tourism and hospitality workforce survey.
The follow-up to the ILO Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work specifies that all member States which have not ratified a core fundamental convention will have to submit an annual report on progress toward implementing the principles set out in said unratified fundamental convention(s).
The following RTOs in the gateway regions are not eligible:
The following are available on the Legislation website:
The following contact information for MBIE media is for journalists and media inquiries only.
The following departments/agencies have been consulted
The following disclaimer applies to the MED. If you publish data from the MED, we ask that you publish this disclaimer alongside the data, in compliance with Stats NZ's policies:
The following graphs show the latest fuel statistics up to the week ending 25 April 2025 (updated weekly).
The following information can be used to set us up in your finance system for invoicing:
The following information is a record of the work done by the previous government on the Fair Pay Agreements legislation:
The following information is a record of the work done up to 2024.
The following information is a record of work done until 2023.
The following is a high-level description of the regulatory process undertaken by officials for payload permits when considering national interests for payload permit applications:
The following process will be led by MBIE officials: • Collect views (including from government agencies and industry stakeholders) regarding the operation and effectiveness of the p rovisions of the Act. • Identify how the Act and regulations can be improved operationally. • Taking into account the consultation, prepare and present a final report to the Minister by 15 December 20216.
The following provides an overview of national interest considerations and processes, in particular for regulating payloads for launch in New Zealand, or by New Zealand entities overseas.
The following regimes, registers or fees are not within the scope of this review: • costs funded by the Crown – eg the Charitable Trust Board s register and sole traders applying for an NZBN ; • levies set to recover the costs of the Financial Markets Authority (FMA) or External Reporting Board (XRB); • the Climate -related Disclosures regime and associated filing fee – this register c ame into force in January 2024 , with fees set by regulations in October 2023 ; and • late filing fees and infringement fees – these are penalty charges and not considered to be cost recovery. What are the proposals? In summary, this document proposes: • A clearer and fairer cost recovery structure to enable full cost recovery which utilises: o levies (to recover the shared costs of the system); and o fees (to recover the remaining costs of specific registry services). • An increase of $6 million in the Companies Office annual expenditure budget to meet identified forecast cost pressures including the need to make incremental upgrades to aging registry systems and undertake compliance, enforcement and education activities including those related to recent legislative changes. • Two new levies which meet some costs which have previously been met by fees: o a Companies Office levy (CO levy); and o a New Zealand Business Number levy (NZBN levy). • Three n ew fees for incorporated societies for new functions under the Incorporated Societies Act 2022 : o annual return fee; o amalgamation fee; and o conversion fee. • Adjustments to fees , where required, across all registers and revoking some fees for services that are no longer provided for some registers. 9 How will the proposals affect businesses and entities? All proposed charges have been developed to make the best use of the money collected from users and provide a clearer understanding of what users are paying for. For some entities, this means that the total amount they pay annually will stay largely the same. Others may need to pay for services that they hav e not been charged for in the past which may mean a slight increase in existing fees, or new fees. MBIE recognises that entities are facing rising costs of operating and ongoing economic impacts. We have taken these cost pressures into consideration in developing proposals and tried to ensure that fees and levies are fair and reasonable for users within the current economic environment. In some cases there are higher increases, however, it is important to note these increases are still below the rate of general inflation since fees were last adjusted in 2017 . Levies are outlined in Section 4 . New and existing fees are outlined register -by-register in Section 5 . A summary of all Companies Office unit costs, proposed fees and levies (including the total proposed charge where fees and levies are charged at the same time ), and the current fees and levies are included in Appendix Two . How will the proposals affect consumers? Given the scale of any increases to charges payable, the Companies Office does not anticipate the cost of any increase being passed on to consumers in a noticeable way.
The following requirements are not an exhaustive list. Breaches of these requirements may amount to misconduct or serious misconduct depending on the nature and severity of a breach.
The following steps will initiate your session:
The following summarise some of the approved payload purposes for science (16), technology demonstration (64), remote sensing (43), educational (14) and other commercial (68). Note some payloads can have more than one purpose.
The form will automatically save the content as you press 'Next'. Press 'Save and exit' to log out of the form.
The formal process for this Briefing is now complete.
The former Tourism Recovery Ministers Group
The forum aims to build confidence, exchange information, and develop a better understanding of underlying energy issues affecting the world.
The framework for providing AL entitlement : In
The functions of Invest New Zealand
The functions of government
The funding comes from the International Visitor Conservation and Tourism Levy (IVL). Other tourism initiatives in 2025 include:
The funding is made available from the International Visitor Conservation and Tourism Levy (IVL) allocation for the development of a tourism data co-governance model and tourism data programme.
The future of business for Aotearoa New Zealand
The future of work is being shaped by 4 broad global megatrends: technology change, demographic change, globalisation and climate change. These global trends create both risks and opportunities for New Zealand.
The gateway test, once in place, can be used by the Employment Relations Authority when responding to a claim that a person is an employee and not a contractor. If the working arrangement in question meets the 4 factors set out in the test, then the person is considered to be a contractor. If the 4 factors are not met, the claim would then proceed to being considered under the existing full test.
The generation of these insights will inform the direction of the strategy, tell us what activities we need to prioritise and engage in, and whether what we are doing is making a difference.
The goal at the outset of the LAS project was that interpreters working in the New Zealand public sector will be NAATI credentialed or working towards their NAATI credential. From 1 July 2024:
The goal is to identify actions all partners can take to address well- known challenges facing the tourism industry and to transform tourism in New Zealand-Aotearoa to a regenerative model.
The goal of the Review is to reduce the exploitation of temporary migrant workers, including international students. Its objectives are to:
The governing legislation is Part 4 of the Contract and Commercial Law Act 2017. Its purpose is to:
The government provided $10 million ($5 million each year) through the Freedom Camping Transition Fund to support local authorities to undertake activities relating to the transition to the new freedom camping rules during 2022/23 and 2023/24. This funding was contestable.
The government reallocated $11.31 million for urgent scientific research and data collection to support the response to and recovery from the early-2023 extreme weather events in the North Island.
The government uses disclosure regulations to monitor compliance with the Deed of Understanding and also the Postal Service Act.
The government wants tourism growth to be productive, sustainable and inclusive. Our goals are:
The government welcomes feedback on changes to these rules and encourages you to have your say at select committee. Keep an eye on the MBIE website for details.
The graph below shows the estimated discounts since 2010 along with the current forecasts.
The graphic below explains how this will work.
The greater the impact of an exposure on the occurrence or development of a disease, the stronger the likelihood of a causal relationship.
The group conducts its projects through 3 networks. We are particularly interested in 2 of these: the Labour and Social Protection Network and the Capability Building Network.
The group contributed their insights into the practicalities of implementing the recommendations in payroll systems, and across a variety of complex employment environments.
The group has 6 branches:
The group has 7 branches:
The group has 8 branches:
The guidance is intended to supplement the procedures and requirements of policy and legislative development already described in major government documents including:
The guide was developed after public consultation to ensure it provides appropriate information and guidance to support effective implementation of the NESTF.
The guiding principles for the review are that the RSE Scheme should:
The health and safety assessment proposal was modified from that consulted on and now requires AEs to be subject to an updated ACC health and safety audit or become ISO 45001 certified.
The health and safety regulatory regime for adventure activities is relatively new, introduced in 2011 and came fully into force in November 2014, following concerns over the management of risk in the adventure tourism sector.
The high capacity links enable New Zealand researchers to engage on an equal footing with their peers internationally. REANNZ uses its network and expertise to provide a range of other services to members, such as internet connectivity, video conferencing, point-to-point links and advisory services.
The high-income threshold will initially be set at $180,000 per annum of base pay. Base pay includes regular salary and wages, and excludes other income such as incentive payments, or benefits such as vehicle use.
The high-level timeline is as follows and as the implementation planning progresses, these timeframes may change:
The image has prompts for conducting a self-assessment of a regulatory system.
The image shows examples of how to conduct a self-assessment of a regulatory system.
The impact of COVID-19 on the tourism sector has been severe.
The impacts of climate change and the need to significantly reduce emissions are likely to affect where New Zealanders live, how we live and work, and how we view and use our land and water.
The importer margin is the gross margin available to fuel retailers to cover domestic transportation, distribution and retailing costs in New Zealand, as well as profit margins.
The income threshold for unjustified dismissal personal grievances will apply to new employment agreements when the legislation comes into force.
The increase in international projects has also supported the production of domestic productions with strong New Zealand stories, such as
The independent experts would produce a report recommending diseases.
The industry is open to collaborating but needs support to overcome transparency and access to better data to support decision-making. This is currently considered a market failure.
The infographic shows the key components of the work health and safety regulatory system. In the centre is a diagram showing the duty holders. On the left-hand side is a pyramid diagram showing the different elements of work health and safety law. On the right-hand side is a diagram showing parties with regulatory functions. An arrow is pointing from the law diagram to the duty holders diagram, and from the regulatory functions diagram to the duty holders diagram. This shows the centrality of duty holders in the regulatory system.
The information MBIE collects from the screen share session is stored in a secure server for 60 days. In some circumstances we may be legally required to retain the screen recordings, for longer than two years, such as if a call recording becomes a public record.
The information below is intended as a guide to the obligations and rights of postal operators, and does not constitute legal advice.
The information in this form enables the Minister to make a decision on the payload permit application.
The information in your proposal is used for:
The information on our social media sites and all government web sites is provided on the basis that persons accessing the web site undertake responsibility for assessing the relevance and accuracy of its content.
The information provided on this page are forecasts made pre-COVID-19, based on econometric modelling, current trends and best-available forecasts of international factors, developed with input from members of the tourism industry. Please bear this in mind when using this information.
The information provided on this website does not replace or alter the laws of New Zealand, or alter any other official guidelines or requirements.
The information provided to the inquiry by MBIE is published on this page. Some information has been redacted consistent with the Official Information Act 1982, and where this has occurred the relevant grounds are indicated on each document. MBIE also provided copies of relevant corporate documents.
The information we collect in funding applications and why
The initial focus of the Tourism Industry Transformation Plan is on developing a Better Work Action Plan for the tourism and hospitality industry. Investing more into people, deepening our talent pool and ultimately providing better work for those in the tourism system is a key component of regenerative tourism.
The initiative has now expanded to include (up to) an additional 26,000 households and businesses with $43 million from Budget 2022.
The initiatives currently underway to support these goals are:
The international firm Startup Genome has prepared a report for the Council on New Zealand's startup ecosystem.
The introduction of more than 180 international legislative instruments with objectives of reduced linear consumption and reuse of materials.
The investment process and funding year they applied for funding from
The issues identified relating to tourism in Aotearoa New Zealand have been the subject of extensive analysis and consultation. This has resulted in a valuable body of existing work, including:
The key components of the law are shown in a pyramid with 5 levels. Starting at the top of the pyramid and going down each level, the components are:
The key difference between the 2 documents is in the definition of the group of employees that the unions request be added to Schedule 1A of the ERA. This is now 'support worker' as defined in the Support Workers (Pay Equity) Settlements Act 2017, which includes:
The labour market dashboard is no longer being updated. The Regional Economic Activity web tool is available as an alternative source of labour market data.
The last date to apply for the Scheme was 15 December 2021. This is to enable enough time for a submission for payment before the Scheme closes on 31 December 2021.
The latest Energy Quarterly data release from the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) shows electricity generation in the October to December 2024 quarter was the lowest December quarter on record since 2016, says MBIE Domains Manager Amapola Generosa.
The latest Energy Quarterly release from the Ministry of Business Innovation & Employment (MBIE) shows the difference weather conditions can make to energy generation in New Zealand.
The latest data, and information on how HAM is produced are available on the
The law increased the duration of parental leave payments over 3 years and 2 stages:
The legislation we manage
The likelihood of the event:
The list is Schedule 2 of the Accident Compensation Act 2001 (AC Act). Cabinet approved this review framework on 16 September 2022.
The main Cabinet papers relating to the former Bill are accessible below.
The main aims of the New Zealand Cycle Trail project are to:
The main aims of the evaluation are to:
The main changes include:
The main changes included:
The main features of the R&D tax incentive include:
The main purpose of the Taskforce is to advise on what changes New Zealand can make to the tourism system, so that tourism enriches both New Zealand and the wellbeing of New Zealanders.
The main purpose of this product is to facilitate understanding of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of Territorial Authorities (TAs) in terms of output over time and by industry group.
The majority of offshore presentations are currently on hold due to closed borders (e.g. Fiji Police and Immigration workshop, Samoan Police awareness programme).
The majority of these students were from Fiji. Fiji was the 10th largest source country of student visa approvals in New Zealand.
The majority were from Samoa (87%).
The majority were in the 20 to 39 age group and more likely to be female (63%).
The majority were in the 30 to 39 age group (44%) and most were males (79%).
The majority were in their 20s and 30s and the gender split is slightly more males than females.
The majority were under the age of 20 years and the gender split is relatively even.
The marketing boost is estimated to result in over 23,000 additional international visitors spending an extra $100 million across the country.
The masterplan has required new thinking to safeguard the core character and values, World Heritage status, conservation values and the visitor experience that New Zealanders and our international visitors expect from such an iconic destination. The foundations of the project are based on manaakitanga and kaitiakitanga, and a true mana whenua partnership.
The material contained in this report is subject to Crown copyright protection unless otherwise indicated.
The material contained in this report is subject to Crown copyright protection unless otherwise indicated. The Crown copyright protected material may be reproduced free of charge in any format or media without requiring specific permission. This is subject to the materia l being reproduced accurately and not being used in a derogatory manner or in a misleading context. Where the material is being published or iss ued to others, the source and copyright status should be acknowledged. The permission to reproduce Crown copyright protected material does not extend to any material in this report that is identified as being the copyright of a third party. Authorisation to reproduce such material should be obtained from the copyright holders.
The maximum amount of funding available to each e-bike charging station is $60,000 (excluding GST). Applicants can apply for one or more e-bike charging stations, but only one application per Great Ride. Ongoing maintenance of the e-bike charging equipment is out of scope of this fund. Any approved funding from the EGR should be used within 18 months of contracting.
The measures came into force on 1 April 2016. They target the worst transgressions of employers without imposing unnecessary compliance costs on employers in general. They include:
The members of the Advisory Group represent a wide range of key sectors and industry organisations in the tourism system. The membership of both the Advisory Group and the Taskforce reflect the cross-cutting nature of the tourism system, and its impacts on many sectors and government portfolios.
The migrant exploitation triage and reporting model continues to facilitate the triage of migrant exploitation complaints through to INZ and the Labour Inspectorate, and the liaison capability provides exploited migrants with advice and connections to support. Migrant exploitation phone line and online reporting established on 1 July 2021, with 1,134 complaints of migrant exploitation received by 2 December 2022. As of 2 December 2022, 314 individuals have been supported by liaison support.
The migration trends data explorer enables users of migration data to easily access the data they need to address the overarching research themes and enduring questions that relate to migration in New Zealand.
The minimum amount of funding available for each event is $5,000.
The modelling frame employed by the AERU measures the economic, social, and environmental consequences of land use change but should be seen primarily as a high-level assessment tool.
The monthly labour market fact sheets have summarised high-frequency and timely data and surveys with a focus around the impact of COVID-19 on the labour market since July 2020.
The more businesses that send and receive eInvoices, the more your business will benefit from saving time on administration and faster payment.
The network established with Fijian authorities will be extended to Tonga and Samoa. The intention is to create a network that can be utilised for future cross-border trafficking or exploitation investigations. Investigative efficiency is being built on both ends.
The new Panel contract starts on 1 April 2025.
The new fellowships are designed to address issues raised by the sector, including career stability, collaboration, mobility, and better representation in the workforce. Key features include:
The new law also proportionately increased the number of Keeping in Touch days:
The new measures include:
The new regime will not capture widespread, consumer-oriented products such as:
The new rules and the regulator will ensure that human health and the environment are protected. Places like Australia, Japan, the EU and England have safely embraced gene technologies.
The new rules and the regulator will ensure that the health and safety of people and the environment are protected.
The new schemes replace the Rutherford Discovery, Rutherford Foundation and James Cook Research Fellowships, which will no longer be offered from 2024. Researchers currently undertaking Rutherford Foundation, Rutherford Discovery and James Cook Research Fellowships will continue to be supported at the current funding levels throughout the duration of those awards.
The nomination form for the 2023 APEC ASPIRE award.
The number of people approved for residence in 2016/17 fell 8% to 47,684 following a 21% increase the year before. The decrease was driven by Parent Category approvals, which fell 63%, and Skilled Migrant Category approvals, which fell 6%.
The objectives for the Recognised Seasonal Employer (RSE) policy review are a set of sustainable long-term administrative settings that work effectively for the government and employers; and a scheme that respects RSE workers and upholds their rights and dignity through an improved set of policies and guidelines, backed by consistent and ethical employment practices.
The objectives of the refinements were to help ensure the new rules and processes for calculating leave entitlements and payments are definitive, clear, and logical, can be systematised, and are workable in all employment situations.
The online form link above takes you to the secure Crimestoppers web form. You and your computer are anonymous. Their call handlers read what you have sent them and will take out any information that might identify you before forwarding it to the relevant authorities in New Zealand.
The online web tool for desktop computers enables comparison of regional data in maps and dynamic charts. This tool will be of special interest for analysts and anyone else wanting a more in-depth tool for exploring regional data.
The only current holder of a launch licence or a facility licence is Rocket Lab.
The opinions, findings, recommendations, and conclusions expressed in this report are those of the authors, not Stats NZ.
The other aspect is we've got the potential to link the digital twin, all the users of the building to an app, or some other thing they can access very easily, probably a mobile app is the easiest. But if you've got a complex there, there might be things like the recycling system or notifying the community about some changes, or making people aware of some maintenance or what things are working, what things aren't, and users the building can notify of repairs, etc. So there is the potential to link in the users with the digital twin and maximise the kind of information and the flow of information that we have for people. And then that might allow people to manage their energy better, or the water use. Or maybe maximise or use their recycling systems better.
The outcome from this review is the development of an updated, accurate statistical classification system with sufficient robustness to allow for long-term usage and implementation.
The outcome of using the framework will inform, if needed, a change to Schedule 2 by an Order in Council. Apart from Acts of Parliament, Orders in Council are the main method by which the government implements decisions that need legal force.
The outlook for New Zealand-Aotearoa tourism
The overarching objective of the Tourism ITP was to contribute to the building of a regenerative tourism system. A regenerative tourism system is one that leaves people, communities, and the environment better than before, and can be understood as an extension of sustainability.
The pace and scale of visitor growth prior to COVID-19 in New Zealand-Aotearoa surpassed the capacity of the tourism system. While visitor growth increased the opportunities and benefits of tourism, it also highlighted the costs, including infrastructure pressures, overcrowding and environmental impacts. Foundational change is needed to ensure that sustainable tourism growth in New Zealand-Aotearoa continues to be underpinned by tikanga values. Foundational change is needed to ensure that sustainable tourism growth in New Zealand-Aotearoa continues to be underpinned by tikanga values.
The paper contained in Annex T hree ( Providing , taking and paying other leave types ) covers four
The paper contained in Annex Two (Provid ing , ta king and p aying a nnual l eave) covers three main areas:
The payment encourages employers to consider if redundancy is necessary, or if alternatives can be found. It will also discourage fraudulent claims. Employers could seek a refund of some or all of the payment if they assist the worker to find work within the initial four-week period. This payment also reduces costs for all employers and employees, supports good employers, and makes sure that the costs of redundancy are more fairly shared.
The permission to reproduce material on this website does not extend to any material that is identified as being protected by copyright owned by a third party. (This includes material on websites you may access via links from this site).
The pilot was implemented by a partnership between a private partner (the Edmund Hillary Fellowship (EHF)) and Immigration New Zealand (INZ). Partnering with a private provider is an innovative and novel feature of the pilot. The Global Impact Visa was designed to facilitate the attraction, selection and integration of innovative global entrepreneurs, investors, change makers and start-up teams. At the end of the three-year visa, migrants can apply for permanent residency.
The plan of action is comprised of 28 actions organised across three key pillars: Prevention, Protection, and Enforcement. These pillars are underpinned by a partnership approach, with effective partnership being critical to success.
The plan of action will ensure:
The plan of action's high-level nature reflects that new approaches may need to be undertaken to adjust to the changing nature and means by which forced labour, people trafficking and slavery are carried out. We will continue to review our approach to ensure it is effective and appropriate.
The policy objectives of the Review Costs Regulations were to ensure that the Regulations will:
The policy objectives of the regular review of the Cost of Treatment Regulations are to ensure:
The policy requires that all publications in scope be made Openly Accessible at the earliest opportunity. The policy is permissive of embargo periods of up to 12 months before manuscripts are made available through Green Open Access, if required by the publisher. Embargo periods of more than 12 months are not permitted.
The policy review has a twofold objective: Sustainable long-term administrative settings that work effectively for the government and employers; and a scheme that respects RSE workers, and upholds their rights and dignity through an improved set of policies and guidelines, backed by consistent and ethical employment practices.
The postal Deed of Understanding sets out the minimum obligations of the national mail carrier, New Zealand Post, for the sale and delivery of postal products.
The postal Deed of Understanding was established in 1989 and is an agreement between New Zealand Post and the government.
The potential investment is reasonable and proportionate to the benefits that would accrue.
The pressure on infrastructure, environment and quality of life for some New Zealanders meant tourism started to lose its social licence to operate.
The previous Minister agreed to clarifications and adjustments to several aspects of the recommendation to address issues and gaps Confidential advice to Government Confidential advice to Government 2324 - 2225 15 identified by our stakeholder working group and to simplify where possible. Despite these , it remains the most complex aspect of the end -to-end rules for AL.
The primary focus of these new initiatives is to make it easier for migrant workers to report exploitation and ensure migrants are able to leave exploitative situations as quickly as possible.
The primary objective of the mission is to demonstrate the operational capability of an extended duration stratospheric balloon.
The principles developed by the JWG aimed to deal with the complexity of the court-based approach. They did this by creating a new pay equity claims process, which was
The proactive release of official information is another element that helps build trust and confidence in government.
The process to develop the Strategy has been extremely valuable, with significant consultation and stakeholder engagement ensuring the strategy vision had broad representation and was inclusive and reflective of the regional tourism sector.
The program is open to any legal entity, meaning that alongside researchers in traditional research organisations, partners can include businesses, local or regional authorities, non-government organisations, community groups and more.
The programme was established to implement the recommendations of two reviews undertaken by MBIE and DIA in 2016 and 2015 respectively. These reviews found that while Government-funded interpreting and translation services are available in New Zealand, a number of barriers and gaps prevent equitable access to public services and information for people with limited English language proficiency.
The programme will be delivered over 7 years, across 3 phases:
The programme will have a direct impact on public safety, by providing greater mobile coverage on stretches of state highway. It will also enhance visitor experiences by providing new coverage in tourism locations.
The programme will move into the business-as-usual stage
The project has identified and mapped the emissions and waste patterns of the seven main advanced manufacturing subsectors to identify opportunities to adopt net-zero circular manufacturing.
The project must be completed within 18 months after the funding approval
The project resulted in a suite of 6 related reports and as Tim said, this is what we will be going through today at the presentation. Essentially the 6 are:
The project used a multi-stage screening process to identify the bioeconomy platforms with the needed desirable characteristics. Some of those characteristics we were just talking about. Essentially image a big pool of ideas that goes through a funnel to get the ones that are most attractive falling out the end. We had to start with Stage 0 looking at all the different sort of products and platforms we have in New Zealand, and they were filtered down to the three priority platforms that we then detailed in more.
The proposal aimed to create new responsibilities across the operations and supply chains of all types of organisations in New Zealand, with more responsibilities for larger organisations:
The proposed Fair Pay Agreement system [PDF 441KB]
The proposed changes are summarised in the table below.
The proposed changes to AEP include:
The proposed scheme most directly benefits working people, but there are also significant benefits for employers. The proposed income insurance scheme would help shift New Zealand to being a higher productivity economy where businesses generate more value and greater returns. The proposal will also create a clearer process for redundancies, with more predictable costs.
The proposed scheme would also go a long way to addressing the current inequity whereby a person who experiences an accident can receive much more support than a person with a non-accident-related health condition or disability, despite a similar loss of ability to work.
The proposed solution adopts one or more innovative aspects (for example, data collection, analysis, culturally appropriate methodologies) which will create value-add in the tourism data system.
The proposed solution is feasible (that is, solutions and infrastructure are evident/available).
The proposed solution will provide an effective method for the services required (for example, validity, reliability, accepted methodology).
The proposed solution will provide good coverage of the required measures (includes regional data where possible).
The public will have an opportunity to have their say on the development of the new NZEECS. Sign up to the Energy and Resource Markets news to be notified when the consultation opens, or keep an eye on this webpage for more information.
The publication is a guide only and should not be used as a substitute for the Convention texts or for New Zealand legislation.
The purpose of a standards and conformance system
The purpose of assessments
The purpose of the Building System Insights Programme (BSIP) is to conduct strategic research and evaluation, which provides sector intelligence and insights, to inform the implementation and effective delivery of the Building System Regulatory Strategy.
The purpose of the Flexible Working Policy is to:
The purpose of the Health and Safety at Work Act is below the pyramid: To provide for a balanced framework to secure the health and safety of workers and workplaces.
The purpose of the Holidays Act Review
The purpose of the Plumbers, Gasfitters and Drainlayers Act 2006 is to protect the health and safety of the public by ensuring the competency of persons who provide sanitary plumbing, gasfitting and drainlaying services.
The purpose of the Prosecution policy is to:
The purpose of the Review is to ensure seismic risk in existing buildings is managed effectively.
The purpose of the fund is to support the development of data sets targeted towards enabling the tourism sector to achieve either improved productivity outcomes or reducing carbon emissions/improving environmental outcomes.
The purpose of these 2 laws is to protect the public and workers, as well as to prevent property damage from the supply and use of electricity and gas. Its coverage includes the safety of electrical and gas appliances and fittings at the time of sale or supply.
The purpose of this Policy is to protect the safety and promote the wellbeing of children who come into contact with MBIE employees or services, and assist our people to respond when child abuse or neglect is suspected or identified.
The purpose of this document is to provide applicants with guidance that will help prepare a safety case that adds value to their organisation and provides assurance that critical public safety risks have been identified and are suitably controlled. Applicants will need to demonstrate that they understand and can manage the critical safety risks that they could be exposing members of the public and their property to as a result of their operations. The size and scope of the safety case will be dependent on the nature and complexity of the operation and the safety risks that the public will or could be exposed to as a result. Public Safety Regulated parties must ensure that the safety of the public is not put at risk by their conduct or undertakings. Undertakings include all of the activities conducted by the regulated party that support, or are intended to support, launch activities. The “public” includes every person whose safety could be put at risk by launch activities. The public needs to be protected from any harm that could be caused by launch activities, including the risk of physical injury or death and of damage to property. All reasonable steps to manage, and continue to manage, the risks to public safety must be taken. The importance of a Safety Case A safety case will help to drive the applicant to meet its public safety objectives and provides for accountability in doing so. All stakeholders (including the regulator) need to have confidence that applicants have carefully thought through and tested how they will keep the public safe. An effective safety case will give confidence to all parties that the applicant is committed to having an operation that carefully considers and manages the risks to public safety, and that they have the capability and capacity to do so. A safety case will help the operation by making it very clear: ȓ what the commitments are to public safety; ȓ providing assurance that the controls are appropriate, effective and will be adhered to;ȓ how public safety is promoted within the operation; ȓ making it clear when the public safety commitmentsȓ that the operation has carefully considered how are not being met; andit could create public safety risks, and what those risks are; ȓ that the applicant is always looking to become even safer. As a participant in the space industry in New Zealand there is the potential that the operations may expose members of the public and their property to the risks that it presents. Should a catastrophic event occur the operation could cause death, serious injury or significant damage to property. Harm may occur to people directly affected by the event, but also to others by association. If the operation is not managed safely, it will be exposed to significant scrutiny which could result in loss of confidence that could affect the licence to operate, and/or a downturn in business confidence. Applicants must satisfy the Minister that they are technically capable of conducting the proposed activity safely and that all reasonable steps have been taken to manage the risks to public safety (and will continue to be taken) before a licence can be granted. 1
The purpose of this policy is to enable accountability for decisions at MBIE, increase transparency about our algorithm use, and strengthen support systems for our staff working with algorithms.
The purpose of this policy is to increase equity of access to our research outputs, increase the impact and innovation potential of our research, and ultimately maximise the return on our public investments in research.
The purpose of this privacy statement is to let users of this website and the MBIE Customer Service Centre know when we collect personal information and what we may do with it. We don't use, share or disclose personal information collected or received through this website except as set out in this statement.
The quality of our regulatory systems has a major impact on the lives, work and businesses of New Zealanders. The Government expects regulatory agencies to be stewards of the regulatory systems within which they work. This means adopting a whole-of-system view, and a proactive, collaborative approach to the care of the regulatory system. The regulatory stewardship role includes responsibilities for:
The questions ask for your insights into the current New Zealand space and advanced aviation sectors and the activities of your organisation.
The rapid growth in tourism pre-COVID-19 was creating flow-on impacts in our communities.
The raw data used in MTAGDP is based on Stats NZ published and custom data, but the methodology was developed by us. Stats NZ will not be held accountable for any error, inaccurate findings or interpretation within the MTAGDP results. Moreover, access to the custom data provided by Stats NZ is under conditions designed to give effect to the security and confidentiality provisions of the Statistics Act 1975.
The recommendations have the Taskforce’s unanimous support and meet the objectives of the review 30. One of the key goals I set the Taskforce was for it to produce a set of recommendations that all of its members supported. The failure of past reviews to achieve consensus, and instead deliver opposing options supported by either employers or employees, is seen by many as the key reason the Act is challenging and why there is widespread non -compliance. With this in mind I consider that there would need to be a very strong case for us to move away from the Taskforce’s recommendations and adopt a different ap proach to reform of the Act.
The recommendations included:
The recommendations of the independent review include:
The recording of your screen share session will be deleted after 60 days, after which MBIE will no longer hold this information.
The redesigned action plan for He Kai Kei Aku Ringa 2023.
The regime is future-proofed to be flexible and pragmatic enough to respond to rapid advances in space technologies, space applications and related market demand. We're one of the first countries to develop laws covering non-rocket propelled activity in high altitudes, such as balloons.
The regulation of people in building trades and professions (occupational licensing) aims to ensure workers in the sector are competent and accountable.
The regulation of people in building trades and professions aims to ensure the people responsible for work done are competent and accountable.
The regulation of the price and quality of goods or services in markets with monopoly characteristics is covered by Part 4 of the Commerce Act, and is implemented by the Commerce Commission.
The regulations identify the detailed information required of all applicants, as well as the specific information that is required for each licence or permit type.
The regulations to extend the transitional period for private vehicles will be passed in the first half of 2025 before the current deadline of 7 June 2025.
The regulator will be required to consider advice from a Technical Advisory Committee. This committee will advise the regulator on
The regulatory changes are to:
The relationship between online job advertisements and labour demand is complex, particularly when disaggregated at an industry, occupation and regional level. For example, an increase in job advertisements in a particular industry may indicate the industry is expanding, and looking for new workers, or the industry has a high rate of turnover or churn (workers are moving between businesses, but overall employment is not necessarily increasing). Likewise, a decline in online job advertisements can signal reduced employment in an industry, or that the industry is using alternatives to online advertising in their hiring processes (such as word-of-mouth or social networks). Alternatively, a decline in online advertisements may signal an industry has less turnover than before.
The relevant sections in the Act are: Payload Overseas Authorisation + 16(2) : Appl ication for payload permit + 17 (1)(b) : W hen payload permit may be granted + 18: C onditions, indemnity, and insurance relating to payload permit + 51: Minister may take into account authorisation granted in country other than New Zealand + 33 (1)(b) : W hen overseas payload permit may be granted + 34: C onditions, indemnity, and insurance relating to overseas payload permit
The remaining columns are not contract specific; they show the overall split of Endeavour funding by reporting year across the FOR/SEO classifications.
The renewable energy strategy connects renewable electricity generation, the Electricity Price Review, a green hydrogen strategy, Gas Act changes, a resources strategy, process heat, Just Transition work, and backing emerging technologies with the Emissions Reduction Plan and NZ Emissions Trading Scheme.
The renewable energy strategy work programme focuses on 3 main outcomes:
The repeal Act and associated regulatory impact statements are set out below:
The report explores potential pathways and opportunities available to New Zealand, but these do not represent policy advice; and the views, opinions, and conclusions expressed in the report are strictly those of the authors.
The report is intended to be a resource for the RSI sector who contribute to the performance of the science and innovation system.
The report of the Independent Taskforce on Workplace Health & Safety - He Korowai Whakaruruhau [PDF 4.1MB]
The report presents selected findings from the 2023 Migrant Survey.
The report provides recommendations for areas where MBIE could make improvements.
The report was informed by analysis of existing secondary information about cycle tourism, consultation with industry stakeholders and a consumer survey of the cycle tourism market in New Zealand and Australia. A link to the full report can be found below.
The reports describe key market trends, identify investment opportunities and profile major businesses.
The reports we publish on economic activity in the regions include summary reports of key statistics, in-depth Regional Growth Study reports and Regional Economic Activity Reports.
The reports will help you to:
The requirement for new Crown funding to meet these costs will depend on which agency is assigned responsibility for space policy and the extent to which resources can be provided through departmental secondments. Develop and maintain New Zealand’s international relationships and obligations for space. As a launching state New Zealand will need to strengthen its engagement in international space affairs. This is likely to include more active engagement with the United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs and potentially membership of the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (COPUOS) the administrator of five international space treaties. It is likely to include participating in discussions with other like- minded nations on space policy matters. The lead space agency will have the primary lead with support from MFATExpanded None. New Zealand will need to accede to the Registration Convention but this does not need to happen before the first test launch.There are three primary COPUOS meetings in Vienna a year. Travel costs are likely to be in the order of $50,000 a year (but there may be scope to combine some of this travel with other scheduled trips). There are also ITU treaty-making meetings in Geneva and meetings for coordination, negotiation and development of international regulations concerning the use of space orbits and satellite spectrum. MBIE is already funding the membership fee for participation of NZ as Member State. There are three meetings per year (costing $50,000 a year). 17 7yr8upqmdi 2016-03-31 09:42:41 s 9(2)(f)(iv) Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Domestic coordination Providing the secretariat to an inter- agency senior officials group which will comprise the domestic coordination committee.The lead space policy agency will have this function.New None The resourcing implications are likely to be similar to other policy coordination functions such as coordinating the Business Growth Agenda senior officials’ groups, and will be managed from within the lead space policy team’s budget. Regulatory functions Activities Agencies New or expanded functionsActivities to be carried out before the first test launchResourcing implications (short- term/long-term) Authorisation function: space launch, payloads and satellites, and national security risk assessmentThe development and administration of a licensing regimeThe authorisation function will be located with the lead space policy agency. The New Zealand Intelligence Community will provide advice in relation to national securityNew Yes For the initial test launch the costs of these functions are being met from within agency baselines. Once the legislation is passed, the costs associated with the authorisation function will be recovered through a licence fee. However, it is likely to be impractical and inequitable to recover all of the set up costs of establishing the authorisation regime from Rocket Lab and some of these costs need to be met through Crown funding. Registration of space objectsCollecting and keeping a record of information about the date/time of launch, the general functions of the payloads/satellites and their orbital parameters.Space regulatory agencyNew Yes Same as above Monitoring and enforcementEnsuring compliance with New Zealand’s domestic space law, our obligations under international treaties and bilateral agreements. Activities will include assessing information provided by Rocket Lab and its clients and physical inspections of Rocket Lab’s premises. Space regulatory agency with support from New Zealand Intelligence Community New None Same as above 18 7yr8upqmdi 2016-03-31 09:42:41 Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Accident investigation Activities required for New Zealand to meet its domestic statutory responsibilities and to comply with the TSA obligationsDepends on the nature of the accident, but likely to involve one or more of Police, Work Safe New Zealand, Transport Accident Investigation Commission and Maritime NZNew in relation to space launch accidentsNone Costs of response and accident investigation likely to be met through general taxation Designation of secure areasDesignating certain areas of Rocket Lab’s facilities as secure areas with restricted access (To comply with the TSA and meet New Zealand’s security requirements) Space regulatory agencyNew Yes Same as for authorisation function Issuing of security cards Undertaking security checks and issuing security cards to control access to secure areas (To comply with the TSA and meet New Zealand’s security requirements)Space regulatory agencyNew Yes Same as for authorisation function Education, information and guidanceProvision of guidance about New Zealand’s regulatory regime for launching space objects. This is likely to include the development of a website as well as seminars and a 0800 number for queriesSpace regulatory agencyNew None (although we will be providing advice and information to Rocket Lab)Same as for authorisation function 19 7yr8upqmdi 2016-03-31 09:42:41 Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act
The requirement to licence all HAV activity would be inconsistent with the principle of ensuring that the costs of licensing are proportionate to the benefits and risks of the activity . A no exemptions approach adopts the presumption that all activity is risky. This would, however, pose a disproportionate compliance cost on low risk HAV operators which would not be consistent with the policy intent. Preferred option : exemptions for low risk HAV activit ies The preferred option will avoid capturing a high volume of low risk activit y, thu s allowing the regulator to focus on activities that pose the greatest risk. The preferred option reflect s the policy intent ion to establish a risk -based and proportionate regime. Balloons that carry only radio -sondes and any one or more of the following sondes: ozone sondes , frost point sondes, and /or backscatter sondes , and the payload is solely used to measure weather , climate, and atmosphere or with devices that only track the progress of the balloon do not pose risks to national security and it is di fficult to If the activity qualifies for an exemption from an HAV licence, there will no additional costs in order to comply with current legislation . HAV activities not exempt will need to seek a licence, but these would be in the elevated risk category, precisely what the Act is regulating. 16
The requirements for MBIE branches to comply with the Model Standards for Information Gathering and Public Trust are set out in the MBIE Information Gathering Policy. Under the Policy the General Manager of each functional area which undertakes information gathering subject to the Model Standards is responsible for putting documented processes in place that ensure information gathering is compliant with the law, the policy and associated procedure, and agency risk management requirements.
The research also developed a hypothetical digital twin use-case for a built environment. The use case highlighted how digital twin technology could unlock more circular outcomes to achieve cost and resource savings. It also showed how digital twins could allow virtual trials of design changes, material and equipment choices, and infrastructure upgrades.
The research examined New Zealand's economic system with a broad perspective. The analysis covered inputs and stocks of raw materials, energy, water, infrastructure and technology, finance, social capital, and human capabilities. It focused on the whole economy, and the sector areas of manufacturing, food, and the built environment which have the greatest potential for emissions reduction through circular approaches.
The research had a focus on the role of digital twins. A digital twin is 'a dynamic and interconnected digital representation of a physical asset or system, enabling comprehensive insights and informed decision making.'
The research programme was undertaken to identify how New Zealand can:
The research ran scenarios to assess at a high level the impacts of converting some sheep and beef land use to forestry to increase bioenergy supply. While gross output rose and emissions fell in these scenarios, localised employment also fell.
The research reports below present findings from the 2019 and 2021 Community Surveys and include some trend data from the previous surveys.
The research was carried out by thinkstep-anz, supported by Aurecon and the Sustainable Business Network.
The research was conducted by the Agribusiness and Economics Research Unit (AERU) at Lincoln University.
The response data is not weighted.
The response included completing rapid building assessments to establish the usability of buildings and the safety of neighbouring properties, local infrastructure and protect the safety of affected communities.
The rest (47%) were partners of work visa and student visa holders.
The resulting report provides an overview of feedback from RBAs on how they were prepared for deployment, including the training, communication, resources and tools they received. It also examines the processes used for deployment, conducting assessments and for ensuring the wellbeing of the RBAs.
The results of a survey conducted in June 2021 of Registered Engineering Associates on their views on raising the annual registration fee.
The review also found that most commercial and public appetite was for forecasts rather than observational (raw) weather data.
The review also noted that the benefits and commercial viability of those innovations were unclear, and that there would be costs to making data more available.
The review assesses if any adjustments to treatment payments are required to take account of changes in the costs of rehabilitation. Previously, the review was conducted on a yearly basis. A biennial cycle was put in place to allow ACC to better understand impacts of previous rate increases, in addition to collecting regular information on the cost pressures impacting providers.
The review concluded that making raw observational data more accessible would likely increase gain for mainly commercial users, while legislative reforms would require significant public resources and come at a cost to taxpayers. These costs would likely outweigh any wider benefits for New Zealanders at this time.
The review considered 4 main questions:
The review costs rates are set out in the Accident Compensation (Review Costs and Appeals) Regulations 2002 (the Regulations) and are paid for by ACC.
The review covers a 5-year period, from November 2014, when the adventure activity regulations were fully in place, to 9 December 2019, the day of the eruption.
The review examined both regulatory settings and the roles and responsibilities of organisations involved in the implementation of the regime.
The review found areas for improvement in the regime including:
The review found that domestic marketing can have a positive influence on off-season travel, regionally dispersed travel, and other long-standing tourism challenges. However, concerns were raised as to whether central Government can justify investment in domestic marketing now borders have reopened and whether central Government should encourage spend in one domestic sector over another. Regional tourism organisations continue to market domestically as normal and have an important role to play in doing so.
The review found that most data reuse principles are being met by NIWA and MetService. MetService has also informed the Treasury and our Ministry that it is making changes to further increase accessibility and reusability of observational weather data.
The review has resulted in ANZSRC 2020, which includes new Divisions for Indigenous studies (in Fields of Research) and Indigenous (in Socio-Economic Objectives), as well as newly defined FoR Divisions for Biomedical and Clinical Sciences and Health Sciences and newly defined SEO Divisions for Environmental Management and Environmental Policy, Climate Change and Natural Hazards.
The review identified that some barriers existed to data availability in New Zealand and that licence restrictions might be limiting innovation and economic opportunities in value-added products and services using weather data.
The review into open access to weather data aimed to identify if a level of government-held data, above that already available, should be more accessible to the public to encourage innovation in New Zealand and promote economic growth. It also considered how observational weather data made available by MetService and NIWA complied with the New Zealand Data and Information Management Principles.
The review is named Project Hau Nuku, which means shifting winds.
The review of ticket reselling in New Zealand is an opportunity to look at how consumers are being affected by ticket reselling practices, and to consider whether further action is required to ensure consumers are well-protected and have fair access to tickets.
The review was not assessing the performance of Tourism New Zealand in marketing domestically whilst the international borders were closed, but rather determining the benefits and challenges for central government marketing tourism to New Zealanders.
The review was undertaken by the Sapere Research Group, with oversight from the Treasury, the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) and the Ministry of Transport. The reviewer engaged with over 50 stakeholders and received significant input from MetService, NIWA and key stakeholders.
The review was undertaken to update the classification to reflect changes in research and development activity that have occurred since the joint classification was first released in 2008.
The reviews recommended introducing interpreting standards in New Zealand to improve the quality and consistency of the interpreting services provided to people who need to use interpreters so they can interact safely and effectively with New Zealand government agencies.
The risk review process aligns with other regulatory assessments and previous policy decisions, including the payload permitting principles agreed by Cabinet in 2019. Officials are commencing a process to consider amendments to the risk review process in light of the values and objectives from the National Space Policy, approved by Cabinet in April 2023, and feedback from the Space Policy Review public consultation.
The rocket was launched on 3 March 2019; however, the launch was unsuccessful due to a technical failure. On the request of the licence holder, the licence was revoked on 13 June 2019.
The role and objectives of the Taskforce
The role of a neutral third party
The role of government is to steer the system in the right direction. Government works as a steward, looking across the tourism system to make sure it is working effectively and supporting the industry to thrive..
The role of religious organisations in prevention/intervention
The sc hools payroll pays approximately 100,000 employees in around 2,500 schools across 14 collective agreements. This amounts to approximately $251 million per pay period and $6.5 billion per annum.
The scheduled 3 year review of the Outer Space and High-altitude Activities Act 2017 (OSHAA) is now complete. This technical and operational review assessed the performance of the Act against its objectives, and considered how it might be improved operationally.
The scheme is free-of-charge for property owners and consumers to use. It relates only to disputes arising from the use, or intended use, of the statutory rights of access granted by the Amendment Act for shared property.
The scheme is no longer accepting new applicants.
The scheme only handles disputes for shared land or buildings (eg, land and buildings in which multiple parties have an ownership interest) for which a statutory right of access is being exercised by a network operator.
The scheme will be funded by levies on wages and salaries, with both workers and employers paying an estimated 1.39% each. These are estimates and will be reviewed after two years. They may need to be adjusted from time to time, depending on the number of claims and how long people receive financial support. This is the same way ACC levies work.
The scheme will have a user-friendly R&D definition, a credit rate of 15 per cent, a $120 million cap on eligible expenditure, and a minimum R&D expenditure threshold of $50,000 per year.
The scheme will pay workers 80% of their salary for up to six months. If they can remain in part-time work with the employer, the scheme will top them up to 80% of their usual salary.
The scheme will require people to look for work or take part in training and rehabilitation. It will be funded by levies on wages and salaries, with both workers and employers paying an estimated 1.39% each. ACC will manage the scheme.
The scheme would be funded by levies on wages and salaries, with both workers and employers paying an estimated 1.39% each. Do you think the levies are good value for the protection and benefits the scheme would introduce for you and for New Zealand?
The scholarship covers specified costs relating to the internships as follows:
The science and innovation systems are critical to boosting the number of knowledge-intensive, internationally-connected firms. We are working to lift business expenditure on research and development, improve the benefits to the wider economy from business development assistance, and harness the potential of the digital economy.
The science and research relationship between New Zealand and Korea is underpinned by a Science and Technology Cooperation Agreement signed in 1997. We regularly hold joint funding rounds, most recently in 2021 focused on artificial intelligence, new materials, and health technologies.
The scope of the RSE policy review includes the following:
The screen industry covers a wide range of businesses, including:
The second package of Fair Pay Agreements Regulations were published on 11 May 2023 and can be found on the New Zealand Legislation website. These regulations were repealed on 20 December 2023.
The second phase is to make legislative and operational improvements to increase businesses certainty and public confidence in WorkSafe.
The second phase of the Rural Broadband Initiative (RBI2) is extending high-speed broadband to more than 84,000 households and businesses in rural and remote areas.
The second phase of the Tourism ITP focused on the environment and tourism.
The second work package looks at the combustion side of a rocket engine. As is often the case with complex R&D, this work package looks quite different from what we initially planned. We initially looked at complex chemistry schemes to understand the reaction rate of our propellants, but we've switched the focus to injector design. It's a testament to our great partnership that we can adapt plans as necessary.
The self-certification scheme will be a voluntary initiative through which eligible building companies, plumbers and drainlayers can sign off on their own work on simple homes. The scheme is expected to free up capacity in the building consent system by allowing BCAs to focus on higher-risk, complex work.
The self-employed are a diverse group. Some depend on a few contracts (such as ridesharing, courier drivers or construction subcontractors), while others (like independent tradespeople) work for many clients. We want to protect people who genuinely lose work for reasons beyond their control, while not covering people who may choose to close their work down in order to access the scheme.
The settlement experience of Pacific migrants to New Zealand: Insights from LISNZ and the IDI [PDF 3.8MB]
The settlement outcomes of migrant youth
The settlement outcomes of migrant youth - a bibliography of New Zealand and international literature
The settlement outcomes of migrant youth: A bibliography of New Zealand and international literature
The settlement outcomes of migrant youth:A bibliography of New Zealand and international litrature.
The seventh round of the Tourism Infrastructure Fund opens on 11 April 2023.
The six successful projects were recommended by a combined international and domestic panel of experts, and will each receive up to $500,000 over three years (excluding GST). We received 29 proposals in total from a wide variety of organisations, showing a promising foundation for future initiatives.
The snapshots present key statistics on:
The solution that Dr Longdell and his collaborators are working on aims to combine special crystals that absorb photons and release them again on demand, with a light source that generates these entangled photon pairs.
The space economy and New Zealand
The start and end date of the funding contract with us (Contract start date and Contract end date)
The statutory review of the Act did not suggest any changes to the national interest provisions in the Act or its regulations but did recommend that the Minister considers developing more specific national interest criteria.
The strategy and direction of Tiaki is guided by a collective of seven organisations across public and private sectors and an independent Tikanga Advisor, while organisations right across the tourism industry help to bring the kaupapa to life.
The strategy has fulfilled its vision when:
The structure and processes of the IEF are determined by a statue that took effect in 2011.
The study addressed 3 main topics:
The sub-sectors mapped were:
The submissions report contains a summary of the consultation feedback.
The survey covered advisers who had application decisions made between 16 July and 15 October 2017. The survey was online between 1 and 30 November 2017.
The survey found that 32 of the 90 homes that met the survey criteria had structural repair work carried out that was non-compliant with the Building Code. An additional 23 homes were assessed as having minor repair defects.
The survey of individuals was conducted with the support of an independent provider whose role included collecting and analysing the information.
The survey of individuals was launched in November 2021 and closed in February 2022.
The survey of organisations was launched in November 2021 and closed in March 2022.
The survey was conducted by Gravitas Research & Strategy for the Migration Evidence and Insights team.
The survey will remain open for your contribution until
The surveys of organisations and individuals were co-designed with the support of a Technical Advisory Group comprised of members of the RSI sector, including human resources experts, researchers and statisticians.
The table below outlines the individual members of the Holidays Act Taskforce and which organisation they were representing.
The targeted review involved analysis of the regulations and their implementation, along with natural hazard analysis. It also involved engagement with key stakeholders involved in implementing the regime.
The targeted review noted there are also a number of system-level issues in the design of the adventure activities regulatory system requiring more consideration. These include that:
The targeted review of the adventure activities regulatory regime was conducted between August and December 2020 and considered whether weaknesses exist in the regime where adventure activities take place in naturally hazardous environments.
The team works with MFAT to negotiate and implement the labour chapters of a range of trade agreements and closer economic partnerships.
The telecommunications service obligations (TSO) regulatory framework enables specific telecommunications services to be available and affordable.
The telecommunications service obligations (TSO) regulatory framework established under the Telecommunications Act 2001 enables specific telecommunications services to be available and affordable.
The telephone and video interpreting service is available to participating government agencies through a government contract.
The telephone and video interpreting services are provided through a panel of providers in over 120 languages:
The temporary migrant worker exploitation review: A summary of changes [PDF 409KB]
The terms of reference for the Review can be accessed here:
The theme highlights scientific research dedicated to inclusivity at all stages of career development. This goal additionally incorporates all facets of society in an effort to shape a more balanced world. This may include research that encourages the increased societal connectivity of underserved and marginalized populations, promotes self-sustaining ecosystems, or achieves solutions to mitigate public health risks.
The third package of MBIE RSABs
The third phase is to work on a regulatory relief package to address sector specific pain points.
The three p arts of the transition plan are an implementation period, transition and savings provisions (which are not a priority for the exposure draft) and information and education
The threshold will initially be set at $180,000 per annum of base pay, and will be updated annually
The threshold will not be adjusted for part-time employment (i.e. an employee working 20 hours per week and earning $90,000 will not be considered above the threshold).
The time period for both data series extends up to the March year before the release year. The industry breakdown is only available for all the years before the last year of the series.
The timeframe for submissions on this discussion document has now closed. The documents relating to submissions and a PDF version of the discussion document are available on the following page:
The trade/ labour framework [PDF
The transfer of innovation functions and disestablishment of Callaghan Innovation.
The transitional period for employees on existing employment agreements will end:
The two- tiered choice for employees may create a further disincentive for employers to negotiate transfer of employment.  Provides employees a clear -cut choice following a choice to transfer employment, between receiving payment for outstanding leave entitlements or having them recognised by incoming employer and retaining the ability to take the time off work. 5. Legislative change that requires the treatment of leave entitlements to be included in Employee Protection Provisions as a matter that the outgoing employer will negotiate with the incoming employer . The matters that will be negotiated would be expanded from the transfer of employment on the same terms and conditions to also include: • whether or not employment will be treated as continuous for the purpose of determining the employee’s service -related entitlements (including leave entitlements under the Holidays Act and rights and benefits under the PLEPA) , • whether or not the new employer will recognise all or part of the employee’s annual and alternative holiday entitlements not taken or exchanged for payment before the date of transfer (instead of the outgoing employer paying them out in accordance with the Holidays Act provisions) , • whether or not the new employer will recognise all or part of an employee’s FBS leave entitlements not taken or exchanged for payment before the date of transfer , • whether or not, where recognition of annual leave and alternative holiday and FBS leave entitlements is negotiated, an employee will be provided a choice in the matter or it will be automatic if they choose to transfer their employment , • how liability will be apportioned between the employers in relation to what employers have negotiated (guidance could also be provided to support this), and • how relevant employee information in relation to what employers have negotiated will be provided to the incoming employer (guidance could also be provided to support this) . Provide that the payment rate for transferred leave entitlements must not be les s than what it would be if it were paid out in accordance with the Holidays Act at the time of the transfer. Requires a more significant adjustment to the current Cabinet policy decision as, unlike options three and four, it departs from the Taskforce’s recommendation to require employers to provide a choice to employees.  Legislation provides clarity about legal requirements.
The types of dispute resolution sit along a spectrum of formality and empowerment, as shown in the image below.
The use of analogies or similarities between the observed association and any other associations.
The use of the framework can also address gaps in our understanding of how occupational diseases impact different population groups in Aotearoa New Zealand. As part of using this framework, independent researchers and medical experts will be expected to take a gender-sensitive approach (as recommended by the ILO
The views and opinions expressed in these articles are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of the New Zealand Space Agency.
The volume of complaints regarding migrant exploitation has now evened out, and further information and education activity is planned for early 2023 to ensure ongoing awareness of options for reporting and notification.
The way in which disputes are resolved and the nature of the outcomes can also affect public confidence in government services and perceptions of quality and fairness.
The way we work expands with increased choices of work settings including collaborative or focused spaces. These spaces positively impact on how we engage and interact with our working environment, colleagues, people leaders, the wider organisation, and our customers. This includes working from home, other MBIE offices, and other locations.
The wider bioeconomy accounts for at least a quarter of all employment in New Zealand depending on how you think about tertiary sectors and service providers. When you look at the New Zealand bioeconomy and the jobs that it creates, the core bioeconomy creates 14% of all jobs in New Zealand. Other related things like supermarkets, food servers, garden supplies, other retailers, pharmacy etc, that sell biomaterials brings you up to 25% of the economy. Research done on the US, which was really good research done on the US, shows that in the US for every job in this core bioeconomy, as we have defined it, another job was created supporting it and that is very clear in the New Zealand context as well. Arguably, and we would stand by it, probably 50% of jobs in New Zealand rely on the bioeconomy one way or another. If you think about things like advertising agencies or banks.
The winning entry will receive a cash prize of USD$25,000 from the publishers Wiley and Elsevier. The prize will be awarded at a ceremony hosted by the United States of America in August 2023.
The work considered whether weaknesses exist in the adventure activities regime when adventure activities take place in naturally-hazardous environments.
The work health and safety regulatory system is made up of the:
The work of the ILO is to:
The work of the RSLGs has been valuable for not only regional stakeholders and partners but also government agencies and will be useful for future skills planning.
The workforce surveys were conducted in 2 parts. A survey of organisations collected information about the makeup of the workforce and organisational policies. A survey of individuals collected qualitative information about skills and experience, learning and development opportunities, connections and collaboration, diversity and inclusion, and challenges facing the sector.
Then I was going to mention Next Space here as well, because we have a range of different vendors doing things around digital twins. Next space is one of them, it's got a cloud-based platform, where you can actually connect a lot of different data streams, using AI and predictive analytics. One of the challenges with digital twins is that we have data in different formats. And by allowing that to be analysed in a way we can pull them together. So AI is really opening up the opportunity for digital twins to connect different modes of large data.
Then we have this example of the fish oil shows, Antler Farms, is an excellent example of a product making clear, strong product claims. They are making lots of claims around their product on their website.
There are 16 main components in a Destination Management Plan.
There are 16 main components in a Destination Management plan. These components have been developed using international research, government frameworks and industry consultation. Use the descriptions and questions in each component to focus thinking, stimulate discussion and identify gaps, opportunities and areas for further investigation.
There are 2 professional membership associations specifically for dispute resolution practitioners:
There are 2 ways that you can send this information to us.
There are 21 agencies represented in the APO, including:
There are 23 pay systems across Health NZ which, along with the level of payroll competence, vary significantly in quality. The capacity of funded organisations to implement changes also varies.
There are 5 facilities, all of which are export-accredited and open access:
There are a few large private dispute resolution providers, but most are sole practitioners.
There are a growing number of local, national, and transnational networks, hubs, and institutes designed to support knowledge exchange, innovation, and adoption of circular practices. Examples include the Circularity Accelerator (World Green Building Council), the Ellen MacArthur Foundation, the Circular Economy Initiative (CEI) Action group, Circular Australia, and the Holland Circular Hotspot.
There are a number of initiatives underway across government that are helping address energy hardship. This section includes some initiatives MBIE is progressing based on recommendations in the 2019 Electricity Price Review.
There are a number of pathways into the NAATI Certification System:
There are a range of educational missions that we have approved payloads for; this includes for students in Mexico, Australia and several U.S. academic institutions who have developed and built CubeSats that we launched in New Zealand. Some of their missions encapsulate research and development and remote sensing purposes and include:
There are a range of other opportunities to enhance the value and outcomes derived from the bioeconomy including:
There are a wide range of science and innovation funding streams within government.
There are also joint operational situations where public servants operating under different legislative authorities may gather and share information while working together to achieve outcomes. For example, regulators coordinating enforcement action (either across or within agencies) or agencies working together to manage a security threat. Any joint operation requires governance, and determination of the lead agency and reporting requirements in advance of the operation.
There are also public accountability agencies that are partly or wholly focused on complaints to or about government, for example the Ombudsman whose primary role is to investigate complaints against government agencies.
There are at least 55 different dispute resolution schemes or procedures in Aotearoa New Zealand. These cover areas as diverse as consumer protection, employment, property and building and human rights.
There are choices to make around what is shared and how widely it is shared
There are long-standing issues in the building and construction sector. These affect build quality and hold back productivity and innovation. A number of initiatives across government and industry are addressing the complex challenges through a reform of the building regulatory system and building and construction sector.
There are many options for cooperation with different costs and benefits. These can range from sharing information and ideas through to adopting the same laws or policy settings.
There are many underlying, and often complex, causes of energy hardship and any solution will need to address these issues across a number of fronts.
There are more than 6.9 million ORCID iDs in use internationally and many New Zealand researchers already have one.
There are no current vacancies.
There are opportunities and implications for future productivity and wellbeing outcomes for New Zealanders. There may be a role for government to help ensure the future outcomes that businesses and New Zealanders more broadly want to achieve, are aligned.
There are opportunities to grow our satellite design and manufacturing capability and our space science, technology and engineering research activity. Some of our universities are actively involved in space-related research. Government agencies, such as Callaghan Innovation, are also involved in encouraging research and development.
There are other pathways available too. Space law is set to be a complex and necessary field in coming years, while studying space science more generally can provide in depth and tailored experience in the field.
There are requirements associated with this right to refuse to work on Easter Sunday for both employers and employees. Find out what
There are risks in adopting the Taskforce’s full set of recommendations, but these can be partly mitigated 41. It is likely that the Taskforce’s recommendations will receive negative feedback, particularly from employers. For example, it is anticipated that employers and payroll providers will be disappointed that an hours -based accrual system is not proposed and w ill react negatively to the level of complexity in the Taskforce’s recommendations.
There are two broad option s for consultation:
There have been delays with the procurement process due to the complexity of the cyber security assessment. It is crucial to ensure that our providers can safeguard data, manage potential risks, and maintain compliance with industry regulations.
There is a growing number of domestic and international standards relating to circular economy. Standards are a key enabler of circular economy transition for many reasons, including setting foundational definitions and principles, ensuring minimum quality and safety of new products, embedding circular economy principles in product design, and providing market access to new producers.
There is a penalty of up to $10,000 for knowingly providing false or misleading information, and registration can be cancelled. Registration details are made available on this website and at our head office.
There is a range of strong economic arguments for this platform, why this platform, why are we looking at it? Obviously, it is an important ingredient. It is a high-value output, which we mentioned earlier. It has proven capability with people investing in the sector. It is an extensible platform in that it can be made into a range of ingredients, perfumes etc. It has a big opportunity for import substitution.
There is a spike in the MED standard output for unknown industries for the period of October 2019 to November 2019. This spike originates from the Inland Revenue Employment Monthly Schedule (IR EMS) data. This does not significantly affect any of the industry outputs.
There is a wide range of digital technologies that can enable a circular economy and bioeconomy in New Zealand. These include artificial intelligence, big data analytics, internet of things, 3D printing, digital engineering, digital twins and digital product passports for traded goods. You can read an overview of the roles that they can play in the report "Digital Technologies, Digital Twins and the circular and bioeconomy" available below. The report was developed through research by Aurecon, Sustainable Business Network and Thinkstep-anz
There is already a lot of work underway
There is also a wide range of other current and potential stakeholders that would be interested in the opportunity to grow this platform.
There is also another one we don't have, which is a really nice public building, that's a digital twin.
There is also growing global attention to the bioeconomy for the opportunity it presents to support more sustainable economic activity and natural resource use, including the International Advisory Council on Global Bioeconomy (IACGB) and the Global Bioeconomy Alliance (universities).
There is another set of regulations that clarifies which vehicles are considered HAVs. This is called the Outer Space and High-altitude Activities (Definition of High-altitude Vehicle) Regulations 2017.
There is no legislative requirement to review the Outer Space and High -altitude Activities (Definition of High -altitude Vehicle) Regulations 2017 and Outer Space and High -altitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulations 2017, but these will be considered wit hin the Review to ensure the regime as a whole is operating effectively.
There is no solution that will produce a payment outcome that reflects precisely what an employee would have earned on a specific day in all situations, but I consider that the consolidated calculation will, overall, provide a fair outcome for both employe rs and employees . The exposure draft will provide an opportunity to test the proposal with stakeholders.
There needs to be more Pacific representation and inclusivity within the banking and finance sector. This is important for fostering trust and relatability between Pacific communities and the financial sector.
There should also be clear rules to calculate the amount of leave being used, and whether leave is available 21. The Taskforce recommends a prescriptive process to determine how much leave needs to be deducted from an employee’s entitlement in order for an emp loyee to
There was no limit imposed on the number of roles an individual could perform in an Endeavour application, therefore some applications may have listed more than one person in each role.
There will also be some other obligations that will apply differently to BNPL lenders to ensure they are workable:
There will be 2 funding rounds:
There will be a 12-month transitional period for employees on existing employment agreements
There will be a 12-month transitional period for employees on existing employment agreements. During the transitional period, employees on existing employment agreements will retain the ability to raise an unjustified dismissal personal grievance. This is intended to provide an opportunity for employers and existing employees to negotiate appropriate terms and conditions before the income threshold applies, if they wish.
There will be an implementation period between when a Bill is passed and when it comes into force. The targeted consultation included a question about what a reasonable time would be for the required system changes to be made. The Government will consider this feedback before final policy decisions are made.
There will be no distortions to incoming employer’s decisions as to whether or not to transfer employment.
There will be no interruption to the Jobs Online processing schedule resulting from this processing change.
There will be opportunities for input during the Review and we would like to hear a range of views. Any public consultation will be notified on the MBIE website.
These Acts made changes in 5 important areas:
These BIMs were prepared for Ministers due to a Cabinet reshuffle following the resignation of Prime Minister John Key in December 2016. These documents were proactively released. Redactions made to the documents were made consistent with provisions of the Official Information Act 1982.
These BIMs were prepared for Ministers due to a Cabinet reshuffle in January 2025. These documents have been proactively released. Redactions made to the documents were made consistent with provisions of the Official Information Act 1982.
These BIMs were prepared for Ministers due to a Cabinet reshuffle in June 2022. These documents were proactively released. Redactions made to the documents were made consistent with provisions of the Official Information Act 1982.
These BIMs were prepared for Ministers following the 2017 general election. These documents have been proactively released. Redactions made to the documents have been made consistent with provisions of the Official Information Act 1982.
These BIMs were prepared for Ministers following the 2020 general election. These documents have been proactively released. Redactions made to the documents have been made consistent with provisions of the Official Information Act 1982.
These BIMs were prepared for Ministers following the 2023 general election. These documents have been proactively released. Redactions made to the documents have been made consistent with provisions of the Official Information Act 1982.
These agreements include the Outer Space Treaty, the Rescue Agreement, the Liability Convention and the Registration Convention:
These alternative approaches have responded to the need for:
These amendments are part of the National-ACT coalition agreement commitment to give greater weight to the intention of contracting parties, where 2 parties enter a contract for services.
These and other global alliances are supporting the development of international agreements that support the transition from the current linear-based economy to a more circular economy. Examples include the UN Global Plastics Treaty, where 175 nations have agreed to develop a legally binding agreement on plastic pollution by 2024, which will reduce greenhouse gas emissions from plastic production, use and disposal.
These approvals have almost doubled in number in the last 5 years.
These are set out here and include a fixed toilet:
These are set out in the Regulations and include a fixed toilet:
These case studies provide best practice examples for agencies to consider in improving their provision of dispute resolution services.
These challenges, the problem we are trying to solve lead to the 6 strategic themes, and this is how we devised that scorecard that would allow us to say which of the products made sense in our future. We are going to need more biomass in the bioeconomy in the future, we are going to need to increase our value-add, we are going to need to build resilience, resilience we have seen from COVID, we have seen through war in the Ukraine, we are trying to build both regional resilience and resilience in our system to shocks. At the same time, we need to reduce agricultural greenhouse gas emissions, we need to replace fossil fuels and we need to rethink waste. Those 6 there really stood out as we looked at different platforms this was the scorecard that we used against them.
These changes are outlined in the Quick Guide and the Implementation Update:
These changes are reflected in the Credit Contracts and Consumer Finance (Buy Now, Pay Later) Amendment Regulations 2023 and will come into force on 2 September 2024. The delayed commencement of these regulations is to ensure BNPL lenders are able to comply fully with the CCCFA.
These changes involve amendments to the Health and Safety at Work (Adventure Activities) Regulations 2016, and updates to the Adventure Activities Safety Audit Standard and guidance materials published by WorkSafe.
These changes will ensure businesses know what to do to comply with the laws and regulations.
These changes will require new legislation which is expected to be introduced in the 2021/22 year.
These communities were identified because of the high dependence on international tourism in their local economies as a result of COVID-19.
These documents were proactively released. Redactions made to the documents were made consistent with provisions of the Official Information Act 1982.
These economic challenges are likely to become more frequent. Technology could replace more jobs currently done by people, or replace the products and goods we produce. The move to a low-emissions economy will see significant changes in how we do things, and some industries, like oil and gas, will be replaced by others over time. Changing consumer demands, an ageing population and increasing globalisation will all contribute to big shifts in what work we do, what things we produce and what skills we need.
These guidelines were developed over 2022 and 2023 through significant engagement with high-use agencies before being taken to the Language Assistance Services Programme Inter-Agency Working Group for further feedback. The Guidelines were endorsed by the Senior Officials Group responsible for the oversight of the New Zealand Migrant Settlement Integration Strategy and the New Zealand Refugee Resettlement Strategy in mid-2024.
These have emerged from Stage II, partly in conjunction with our client are the ones to take forward, it was not a numeric process it was a joint decision with the advisory group.
These links provide definitions of the entities we monitor.
These modules are also available through the Leadership Development Centre.
These objectives will be achieved through a range of legislative, operational and regulatory changes to transform performance across the system.
These online learning modules are designed for public servants in customer facing roles, or for public servants who are likely to work with people where they do not share a language. They have been developed by the Ministry for Ethnic Communities with support from the MBIE Language Assistance Services team and other organisations.
These organisations will have an increased focus on economic outcomes while delivering the critical stewardship and public good science and science services needed for a well-functioning modern economy.
These pages describe what Destination Management (DM) is and how to go about creating a DM plan for your region or community. They provide suggestions on components that could be included in a plan and questions to stimulate discussion and identify gaps, opportunities and areas for further investigation.
These papers have been produced or commissioned by us and contain important insights on issues relevant to our policy portfolios.
These partnerships are being designed through a process of negotiation between the partners (generally research funding agencies and other public authorities of EU member states and Associated Countries) and the European Commission. The outcome of these negotiations will determine the work programme and activities for the partnership, how the funding is allocated, and what opportunities there are for New Zealanders to get involved.
These payment times are updated every 3 months.
These principles underpin flexible working arrangements at MBIE:
These projects tackle important societal challenges; how will this collaboration give you an advantage in this area?
These protections include the ability for an employee to elect to transfer to a new employer on their existing terms and conditions. For example, if the business they work for is sold, or a contract for services is changed to a different service provider.
These regulations do the following:
These regulations prescribe persons who provide fibre fixed line access services as being subject to information disclosure regulation and price-quality regulation. As a result of being prescribed in these regulations, the persons become regulated fibre service providers under the Act.
These reports are designed for use by government, investors, and businesses and have a focus on near term investment-ready opportunities and what is required for New Zealand to be internationally competitive.
These rules have not changed under the Self-Contained Motor Vehicles Legislation Act:
These services receive funding from the Telecommunications Development Levy and are delivered by a contracted provider, Concentrix Services (New Zealand) Limited.
These social media tiles feature the following message in a range of languages, "Do you need language support when calling government services? Ask for an interpreter"
These system-level issues will be considered as part of a first principles review of the regulations beginning in 2026.
These temporary rates will apply until such time as regulations setting out the interest rate and waiver circumstances are made. MBIE and ACC intend to consult on these, subject to Cabinet approval, later this year.
These terms of reference describe the purpose, role, functions, membership, systems and processes of the Start-up Advisors Council (Council).
These terms of use may be updated any time without notice.
These videos are available on the business.govt.nz website and YouTube channel.
These web pages are a guide only. They should not be used as a substitute for legislation or legal advice. The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment is not responsible for the results of any actions taken on the basis of information in these web pages, or for any errors or omissions.
They always had a passion for space, and would love to take on the role, but with a mortgage and two children, Angeli is nervous to trade their secure job and enter a new industry. The introduction of an income insurance scheme provides them with the security they need. Angeli takes the risk, and, two years later, is still working for the same company as one of their lead rocket engineers.
They can often achieve faster outcomes at a lower cost. Parties are also more likely to be satisfied with the result and compliance rates are likely to be higher, so less enforcement should be required.
They could develop fresh fruit and vegetables that are more resilient to pests and diseases. This would mean more food ends up on the table and lessen the bin.
They may also include other bills that address matters that would be considered by a different select committee than the above bills, such as building and housing.
They will maximise the value of public investment and create a more dynamic science, innovation and technology system that can respond to priorities and keep pace with technological advances.
Third parties (eg compliance certifiers, inspection bodies)]
Third-party fundraisers are commercial businesses used by many charities to raise funds. They are either professional fundraisers who are contracted by charities to raise donations or commercial operators that have an association with a charity and donate a portion of their profits from selling a good or service.
Thirty-eight percent of the Pacific population in 2013 was born overseas - the largest numbers were born in Fiji and Samoa. Pacific migrants tend to settle in Auckland for employment opportunities and its large Pacific communities. Employed Pacific migrants are over-represented in lower skilled occupations, such as labourers, and machinery operators and drivers, and are under-represented in higher skilled occupations, such as managers and professionals.
This $10 million fund is helping tourism businesses to develop digital strategies, access digital tools and benefit from existing government digital enablement initiatives. The fund is split between two separate initiatives.
This $50 million Regional Events Fund is designed to stimulate the domestic tourism market by supporting existing events to continue to operate, or supporting new events to form.
This BIM was prepared following the appointment of a new Minister for Media and Communications.
This Briefing is available as an accessible web version and PDF:
This Government is focussed on helping more Kiwis into work and giving them greater opportunities to realise their potential.
This MBIE scheme will build on our excellent science and research teaching to build key skills in the workforce and create additional opportunities to address sector needs. It will enable more students to use their theoretical knowledge to respond to practical problems in real-world environments.
This Memorandum of Cooperation (MOC) will enable the exchange of information to support the administration and enforcement of the domestic immigration laws of both New Zealand and Japan.
This Policy aligns with the following MBIE guiding principles:
This Policy applies to all employees of MBIE who come into contact with children or young people as part of their role.
This Scheme aims to equip as many rural and remote New Zealanders as possible with the connectivity infrastructure needed to access broadband services where they live.
This Subpart provides specified employees who are affected by certain restructuring situations, such as a company being sold or a contract being transferred, with the option to transfer to the new employer on the same terms and conditions.
This allows for products at the end of their useful lives to be given a completely new life, while also preserving the maximum value. Remanufacturing contributes to conserving the materials within products and helps prevent the generation of waste.
This also benefits employers as it contributes to New Zealand becoming a higher productivity economy where businesses generate more value and greater returns. It helps maintain consumer spending through economic shocks, and keeps people connected to their employers.
This announcement follows government consideration of the first report of the Science System Advisory Group.
This approa ch provides the flexibility for employers to adopt a range of approaches that best suit their specific business circumstances . It is intended to support co mmon practice and would provid e certainty about legal obligations in restructuring situations. It will minimise the risk of distorting the negotiation process between employers. It would also require but maintain flexibility around the commercial negotiation about the apportionment of liability and transfer of employee information . The proposal includes a safeguard for situations where an employee transfers employment on a lower rate of pay so the value of transferred leave entitlements is not affected .
This can be considered if relevant.
This commentary presents the national context for tourism in the year ending March 2019 (and for the March 2019 quarter where available). The main tourism measures are showing slight growth across the New Zealand tourism industry, strengthened by growth in visitors from outside the top six markets, as well as relatively favourable exchange rates.
This consultation is now closed.
This consultation is now closed. The following information is a record of work done until 2023.
This creates a liability risk for an employer. The liability arises because leave in advance is ‘unearned ’ and payment made for it is above what the employee would be entitled to be paid out for AL if employment ended. MBIE’s stakeholder Working Group raised concern about the difficulties for employers to recover overpayments . • Rescind the 2020 Cabinet decision. I consider that the new requirement to allow an employee to access the accruing amount of AL entitlement during a closedown period is a fair balance of interests. Determining use of AL Methodology for determining hours an employee would have worked on a day of leave A core part of the new methodologies Cabinet agreed to in 2020 for determining the use of leave entitlements was a formula for determining the number of hours an employee who does not have clear daily hours would have worked on a day of leave.
This data dictionary details the various outputs produced by the MED process, defines the variables observed in the data, and provides a comprehensive list of all categories encountered in the data.
This data dictionary provides information on the sectoral output for the Migrant Employment Data release.
This data, released on the 31 January 2025, includes final data till May 2024 and provisional data to October 2024.
This dataset allows you to download and analyse the diversity data we have collected from applicants and assessors since 2019. It provides a picture of the diversity of our funding applications, whether successful or not, by fund, year, and information type. This information is updated annually.
This declaration enables us to ensure that appropriate measures can be taken to prevent or limit any direct or indirect harm that may result as a consequence of technologies of special interest being used in our investments.
This decrease was driven by a 32% decline in new approvals from India (our second largest source country), which more than offset a 5% rise in new approvals from China (our largest source country).
This diagram contains the parties with regulatory functions. From top to bottom, they are:
This diagram illustrates key steps in the ongoing DM process. In order, these are listed as:
This diagram shows where New Zealand tourism data is sourced from, what method has been used to compile it, and the relationship the sources have to each other.
This document explains the variables used in our weekly oil price monitoring.
This document is a guide only. It should not be used as a substitute for legislation or legal advice. The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment is not responsible for the results of any actions taken on the basis of information in this document, or for any errors or omissions.
This document is the culmination of a multi-year, multi-agency work programme to increase the quality, quantity and accessibility of Language Assistance Services in Aotearoa New Zealand. It provides an overview of the operational policy requirements as well as best practice guidelines for public sector agencies and the services that they fund.
This evaluation is part of the monitoring of the performance of the Great Rides. It details how the 22 New Zealand Cycle Trail Great Rides are impacting trail users, the communities in which the trails are located, and New Zealand as a whole.
This evaluation was designed to better understand how well the current system is aligned with its intended objectives and to explore the underlying causes of issues with its efficiency, predictability and effectiveness.
This exclusive right is based on the idea that intellectual property rights give people an opportunity to make a return on their investment in creativity or innovation. It also provides an incentive for creative or innovative activity that might not take place otherwise.
This exploratory research report provides insights into the supply chain of building products imported into New Zealand.
This file is updated monthly. It currently contains data from May 2007 through to
This former public-private taskforce was set up to lead the thinking on the future of tourism in New Zealand. Members consisted of cross-government and tourism sector representatives and led recommendations on further policy and regulatory reform in the sector.
This funding will support the development of aerospace technology capability, establishing enduring research partnerships with Germany and jointly contributing to solving global economic, environmental, and social challenges.
This glossary is a collection of terms used by policy-makers, practitioners, and users of dispute resolution services in New Zealand.
This group delivers services that support the aspirations of New Zealanders.
This group has 13 branches:
This group has 7 branches:
This group works in partnership with business groups to enable them to deliver their objectives and portfolio obligations. Corporate and Digital Shared Services supports the stewardship obligations of the organisation including its medium and long-term sustainability, finance, health, capability and capacity.
This guidance covers the essential issues you need to consider for dispute resolution clauses when drafting a contract.
This guidance is intended for:
This guide provides practical advice and information to support government agencies and other organisations in Aotearoa New Zealand to better communicate with Culturally and Linguistically Diverse (CALD) communities.
This handbook is a practical guide to working with the Language Assistance Services Operational Policy from 1 July 2024 when the NAATI standards were adopted across all public sector agencies and the services they fund. The handbook is organised as a series of information notes for staff, usually on the front line, working with people with limited English proficiency. This handbook explains how the policy from 1 July 2024 works in practice.
This includes Cabinet papers and minutes, responses to requests under the Official Information Act 1982, and lists of Ministerial documents.
This includes any workers who advertise services through your website.
This includes ensuring internet resources are managed in a way that supports the interests of New Zealand end-users of telecommunications services.
This includes ensuring that the work environment and location the employee works in is safe.
This includes looking at how the building regulatory system protects lives at an acceptable level of risk and cost.
This information has been developed for businesses and policy makers to support greater awareness about the growing number of policies and regulations being introduced in many countries. The overview draws on research conducted by Thinkstep-anz, Aurecon and the Sustainable Business Network.
This information will be shared in accordance with our statutory powers, with appropriate caveats and/or controls, and in compliance with the relevant legislation and any information sharing agreements with the other agency. This may include when we are considering and investigating compliance breaches, concerns, and initiating our own investigations or inquiries. We will take all practicable steps to verify information provided to third parties.
This initiative seeks to better prepare students for future careers in the New Zealand aerospace sector. This is a unique opportunity to work on world-leading NASA missions and science, alongside NASA scientists and engineers.
This investment will build important capability in our space sector, enable New Zealand researchers to work with world-leading atmospheric scientists, and make an important contribution to slowing global warming.
This is a $25 million allocation, with an actual spend of $19.678 million, to offset the payment of tourism concession fees to the Department of Conservation. Fees have been waived for the period 1 March 2020 until the end of June 2021 providing cash flow for tourism businesses but also maintaining investment in conservation that these fees normally contribute to. For more information see the announcement on 26 June 2020.
This is a 24-hour service.
This is a 24-hour service. The NZ Relay app is free to download from the App Store and Google Play Store and uses mobile data or a Wi-Fi connection.
This is a complex area and including the option above in the exposure draft will provide the opportunit y to test it with stakeholders for practicality and any unintended consequences or further complexities we may not have considered.
This is a general course which focuses on the key aspects of understanding the role of interpreters and accessing and working through interpreters to ensure effective communication.
This is a new part of the our website and not all portfolios currently have content. We will add more information over time as the site is developed.
This is an example of aspirational and healthy life stylers, and we have a number of growing brands across this space, and this is just an example of some of them.
This is an important issue to explore. Although many young people navigate transitions from school to work, education or training, a significant proportion face barriers which prevent them from reaching their work goals and aspirations.
This is the Application Form for the Regional Tourism Boost Fund. This $3m contestable fund was set up in 2025 to support regions to attract more international visitors and encourage dispersal of international visitors around the country.
This is the overarching BIM, designed to provide ministers with information on our role, purpose and organisational structure.
This is the second cohort of Kiwi students selected to undertake in-person internships at JPL and the third cohort to undertake internships at Ames. The 2021 and 2022 JPL Internship Programme was offered online under the NASA JPL Covid-19 remote working conditions.
This is the web version of the Destination Management Guidelines.
This is the web version of the Enhancing telecommunications regulatory and funding frameworks discussion document
This is the web version of the Government's Tourism Snapshot.
This is the web version of the Kitmap report.
This is the web version of the New Zealand Space and Advanced Aviation Strategy.
This is the web version of the discussion document 'Moving towards a financially sustainable mail service'.
This is where a flexible working arrangement is part of your employment agreement. It describes a regular pattern of working hours, days, or location.
This list will be added to when new information is available.
This may be in order to carry out legislated functions or to assist another state sector agency fulfil its regulatory compliance, law enforcement, or protective security responsibilities.
This may include us receiving or requesting information from other people or agencies. Any such information will be gathered in accordance with our statutory powers or other lawful authority and in compliance with the relevant legislation and any information sharing agreements.
This means any company or individual can operate a business delivering letters as long as they meet the requirements of the Postal Services Act 1998.
This means that employees earning over the threshold will not be able to raise an unjustified dismissal personal grievance claim. Employers and employees will be able to agree to opt back into unjustified dismissal protection before, or at any point during, the employment relationship.
This means that where the employer and employee agree to a set number of hours they are required to state those hours in the employment agreement.
This means that working arrangements which meet a new smaller set of criteria will be considered to be contracting arrangements (i.e. the workers would not be considered to be employees), and will not need to apply the full test in section 6 of the Employment Relations Act 2000.
This might be through shifting an existing industry to higher value, shifting the performance of large and interconnected industries, or scaling up high potential industries to be a larger part of our future economy.
This might be to help you complete a form or find some information on our website. We use a tool called GoTo Assist and it can be used to support any customers calling MBIE Customer Service Centre lines.
This notice must be given as soon as reasonably practicable. It also needs to be given before the earliest of either:
This opportunity is open to New Zealand research organisations for projects that align with the objective of developing enduring science and innovation collaborative partnerships with world-class Chinese research organisations in the priority area of Environmental Technologies.
This outlines a number of proposed changes to teams across the Business and Consumer organisational structure.
This outlines the proposed approach to implement the Government's decision to cease funding and close the Consumer Advocacy Council as part of the Budget 24.
This page allows you to make an online request to us under the Official Information Act (OIA).
This page contains contact details for the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE).
This page contains individual 1-page international tourism forecast summaries for each market.
This page explains the different regulatory system amendment bills that we have used to update legislation we administer.
This page explains the ways that countries can cooperate to improve the quality and effectiveness of domestic law. It includes case studies of cooperation in practice.
This page explains what dispute resolution is, why it is important and how it is practiced in New Zealand.
This page explains where you can go to resolve your dispute.
This page has information about space events for students across Aotearoa, competitions, and educational resources.
This page has information resources about the New Zealand screen sector.
This page has our tourism forecasts for major tourism markets, updated for the 2019-2025 period.
This page is about the protection of new plant varieties and our review of the Plant Variety Rights Act 1987.
This page lists current lay members appointed to the High Court for Commerce Act matters.
This page lists energy statistics and modelling publications, technical papers, reports and guides produced by us or for us.
This page lists only a few of the courses you might like to explore. There are many more on offer at universities throughout New Zealand. We endeavour to keep this content current, but as the information about these courses belong to third parties, we cannot guarantee it will not change. For the most up to date information on what is available, check the university websites. These courses are not a guaranteed or endorsed pathway to a space career. The New Zealand Space Agency and MBIE do not endorse any particular course, university or organisation listed on this web page.
This page lists our consultations relating to health and safety.
This page lists the current postal operators in New Zealand and their postal identifiers and contact details.
This page outlines the methodology for the Modelled Territorial Authority Gross Domestic Product estimates of annual GDP estimates for 66 territorial authority areas and 18 industry groups.
This page provides a summary of the submissions MBIE received on the Recognised Seasonal Employer (RSE) policy review options through the consultation process.
This page provides an overview of current and closed consultations and reviews on energy sector issues.
This page provides an overview of current and closed consultations and reviews on minerals and petroleum issues.
This page provides an overview of developments in international policy and regulatory environments that relate to the Circular Economy and their implications for Aotearoa New Zealand.
This page provides an overview of the Recognised Seasonal Employer (RSE) policy review options that MBIE sought your views on through the consultation process. More detail on the relevant policy considerations is contained in the full options document.
This page provides details of current vacancies for boards that we monitor on behalf of responsible ministers.
This page provides important information for suppliers of goods and services to the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE).
This page provides information about the implementation of recommendations from the 2015 independent review into accident compensation dispute resolution processes.
This page provides information about trade barriers and how they arise and where to go for help with trade barriers that are making it difficult to export to a particular market.
This page provides information on applying to be a postal operator and your obligations and rights as a postal operator in New Zealand.
This page provides information on tariffs in New Zealand including tariff concessions, tariff reviews and the harmonised system nomenclature.
This page provides links to our consultations relating to health and safety.
This page provides the Cabinet papers and regulatory impact analyses for previous reviews of the minimum wages.
This page sets out background information on a package of reforms of the Companies Act and related corporate governance legislation
This page sets out background information on the review of the Incorporated Societies Act 1908 and the enactment of the Incorporated Societies Act 2022.
This page summarises the changes to the consumer credit laws that resulted from the review that took place between 2009 and 2015.
This paper seeks Cabinet approval to release the ticket reselling discussion paper for public consultation.
This policy and its supporting documents may provide a guide for best practice unless specifically excluded in the relevant offshore policy manual, or in conflict with local legislation or terms and conditions of employment. In such circumstances local legislation will apply.
This policy applies to all employees, secondees and fixed-term contractors (our people) employed or engaged on any basis by MBIE, whether they are casual, temporary or permanent, whether full time or part time in Aotearoa New Zealand and or assigned offshore.
This policy applies to all peer-reviewed research outputs arising from research projects fully or partially funded through research investment processes administered by MBIE, and requires that these outputs be made available through Open Access pathways as outlined below. This includes:
This policy applies to all staff, secondees and contractors employed or engaged on any basis by MBIE (our people), whether they are casual, fixed term or permanent, whether full time or part time and whether they are in New Zealand or in any other country who is involved in prosecutions brought by MBIE, including those authorised to make a decision to prosecute.
This policy builds on the examples of many public research funders around the world, and brings Aotearoa New Zealand in line with international best practices.
This policy does not apply to personal grievances, disputes relating to employment within MBIE or offending by our people outside of their employment with MBIE.
This policy does not cover overseas remote working.
This policy is referrred to in the Request for Proposals for the 2015 science investment round and the Request for Proposals for the National Science Challenges.
This policy requires that all peer-reviewed publications arising from research funded through research investment processes administered by MBIE be made available with Open Access (free of charge, online access for any person) through one of the approved pathways. These must be made available either:
This policy strongly recommends, rather than mandates, that research data arising from funded projects be made openly available whenever they are not precluded by indigenous data sovereignty considerations, copyright restrictions, confidentiality requirements, or contractual clauses.
This privacy information applies to personal information collected through this website and MBIE Customer Service Centre.
This privacy statement applies to personal information collected through www.mbie.govt.nz. It also includes how personal information is treated by our MBIE Customer Service Centre.
This programme has a practical focus, with tourism operators able to improve their knowledge and practical capability through workshops and one-to-one programmes. It also builds on the support that Qualmark has been providing to tourism operators through its Tourism Advisory Support Service.
This project has been an amazing kick-start for our relationship and has led to several other projects with DLR. The data we've collected to date has already led to real performance improvements in our hardware, and with so much more to learn, we're excited about what's still to come!
This public register is a record of high-altitude licences issued by the New Zealand Government.
This publication outlines the conventions New Zealand has ratified and the agencies that administer them. It also provides a brief outline of how they are implemented in New Zealand and includes references to relevant legislation.
This regulatory impact statement has been prepared by the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment. It provides an analysis of options for regulations under the Outer Space and High -altitude Activities Act on the following issues: o The application requirements for licenses and permits, and o Whether any class of high -altitude vehicle (HAV) should be exempted from the requirements of the regime. We note that in respect of application requirements, due to the OSHAA Act requiring applications to be made in the prescribed form, there is no option to have no regulations . We also note that space activities, in particular launche s of vehicles and payloads into outer space, are new to New Zealand and, as a result of the fledgling nature of the industry in N ew Zealand , we only expect a small number of applications in the short -to-medium term . This means the implementation of the r egime is likely to evolve over time, which has influenced our approach to the regulations. We have undertaken some analysis of the extent of HAV activity occurring in New Zealand, but it is difficult to assess whether this accurately reflect s the full extent of the activity going on. New Zealand is the only country in the world to introduce a high -altitude vehicle regime . Therefore we have no international comparators to use as a bench mark for the proposed regulations. We have tested the proposed requir ements with stakeholders including New Zealand and international space industry participants, HAV operators, and domestic agencies who will be involved in conducting the statutory assessments. We have used their feedback to modify the information requirements and the approach to HAV exemptions.
This rental bond data provides information about the activity level in the housing rental market.
This report assesses how well the rapid building assessment system functioned during the response to the 2023 North Island severe weather event and identifies areas for improvement.
This report builds a profile of recent migrant youth in New Zealand by analysing immigration approvals data and Statistics New Zealand
This report combines our labour market monitoring programme with the latest developments in the labour market to paint a summary of labour market trends up to the latest quarter.
This report contains output produced from the Integrated Data Infrastructure (IDI), managed by Stats NZ. The results are not official statistics. They have been created for research purposes from the IDI.
This report describes the size and nature of the New Zealand screen industry and examines the impact of the screen industry on the economy.
This report draws on data from a number of sources, including two surveys we carried out in 2017 and 2018 to find out how aware landlords and tenants are of the new requirements. We also looked at what action had been taken to comply with them.
This report establishes consistent monitoring on the performance of the building consent system, with a particular focus on building consent and code compliance certificate timeframes. The data shown here is as reported by Building Consent Authorities (BCAs).
This report evaluates the impact of the New Zealand Screen Production Grant for domestic and international productions.
This report examines post-natural disaster dispute resolution in New Zealand. It provides an overview of the types of disputes that arise in the aftermath of a natural disaster, discusses dispute resolution responses in New Zealand and in other jurisdictions and suggests improved options for New Zealand informed by best practice.
This report goes to great examples of a lot of these and how they are procuring their brands.
This report looks at the migration trends of migrants from the Pacific from 2012/13 to 2016/17 using Immigration New Zealand data. It also examines the settlement outcomes for Pacific migrants, primarily using data from the 2016 Migrants Survey.
This report looks at the migration trends of migrants from the Pacific over the last 5 years using Immigration New Zealand data.
This report presents selected findings from the 2021 and 2022 Migrant Surveys, describing working conditions experienced by migrant employees.
This report provides Ministers with the draft Project Hau Nuku: Weather forecasting system review Terms of Reference (ToR).
This report provides a summary of the key findings from the Immigration New Zealand (INZ) Advisers survey 2017 conducted among licensed immigration advisers, immigration lawyers and offshore student advisers who apply for a visa on behalf of others. The survey reports on their experience of dealing with INZ.
This report provides an evidence base to inform these choices.
This report provides an independent peer review of the report Evaluating the New Zealand Screen Production Grant
This report provides an introduction to online dispute resolution (ODR). It sets out the concepts which fall within a broad definition of ODR and traces their development. It discusses the benefits and drawbacks of ODR, both generally and in specific contexts, and examines some posssible future developments.
This report shares analysis of our current research infrastructure holdings, the types of research and capabilities they enable, and the ways they are accessed and used. It also aims to increase understanding of our broader research infrastructure portfolio.
This report summarises findings from the 2015 to 2019 Migrant Survey's.
This report summarises the evaluation of a Pilot project focused on using the BRANZ Artisan tool for the creation of digital records of low-risk plumbing and drainlaying (plumbing) work.
This report uses the All Vacancies Index (AVI) to measure changes. The AVI is calculated by using raw unweighted data from the 4 internet job boards mentioned above. Comparisons using the AVI can be distorted by small numbers of online job advertisements.
This research collates and analyses emissions and waste stream data for the advanced manufacturing sector. The information is presented by subsector and allows for analysis of where significant and targeted impacts can be made for emissions and waste reduction.
This research consists of a summary report, technical report, and data set.
This research estimates the contribution of insights into Emissions-intensive, Trade-exposed (EITE) businesses to national and regional employment and gross domestic product (GDP) and highlights their role in their respective supply chains. Using Input/Output tables the report estimates the potential economic loss, should EITE businesses be induced to change the level of their production in the future.
This research project examines the nature and use of private commercial mediation in New Zealand by conducting a survey of commercial mediators. The main aim was to move from anecdote to evidence by gathering empirical data from people working in this field.
This research project identified the critical barriers, enablers and approaches that would be needed for a more circular economy in Aotearoa New Zealand by 2050.
This research provides a summary of progress made by 38 territorial authorities towards identifying potential earthquake-prone buildings
This research provides an annual monitor on the state of the building and construction sector.
This research provides insights on the initial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on businesses, workers, and end-users within the New Zealand building system.
This research was led by The Connective and collaborators.
This research was the first of its type for New Zealand and should be viewed as a starting point for this type of analysis due to current data gaps. Greater availability and quality of data would strengthen future analysis.
This review will look at the most efficient and effective arrangements for the provision of national weather research, observation, modelling, forecasting, warning, severe weather impacts, data access, and communication services in New Zealand.
This section characterises the research infrastructure portfolio across the institutions.
This section contains resources related to dispute resolution in Aotearoa New Zealand.
This section contains the most recent editions of our set of ongoing migration monitoring reports.
This section covers historic reform of legislation supporting the integrity of the corporate system.
This section covers oil security, the oil emergency response strategy, engine fuel quality, biofuels, the Fuel Market Financial Performance Study 2017 and duties, taxes and direct levies on motor fuels.
This section covers the Framework which provides an outline for designing a new scheme, or assessing or reviewing whether an existing scheme is fit for purpose and consistent with best practice.
This section covers the electricity industry's regulatory framework, how the industry works in New Zealand, how to apply for electricity operator status and the Smart Grid Forum.
This section covers the way in which decisions about research infrastructure are made and how it is managed across its lifetime, and the sources of funding for investments in infrastructure.
This section explains how we collect, use, and share information when we are carrying out our functions such as considering and investigating compliance breaches, concerns, initiating our own investigations or inquiries, and determining compliance strategies.
This section explains our stewardship role across regulatory systems, including the main elements of our approach and how we assess regulatory systems.
This section has analysis of trends in the data we have been collecting ourselves, or from other organisations.
This section has best practice guidance for developing new dispute resolution schemes and assessing and reviewing existing schemes.
This section has detailed guidance on developing new dispute resolution schemes and assessing and reviewing existing schemes.
This section has research aimed at increasing our understanding of dispute resolution in New Zealand and case studies that provide insights into how dispute resolution is practiced here.
This section includes the Tourism Electronic Card Transactions (TECTs), Accommodation Data Programme (ADP), International Visitor Survey (IVS), Tourism Satellite Account (TSA), and data on international travel and cruise visitor spending in New Zealand.
This section is about our work to improve energy efficiency, including lowering greenhouse gas emissions and fostering growth in renewable energy.
This section outlines our current understanding of how New Zealanders use the mail service and how that has changed over time. The section concludes with questions for you on how you use the mail service now and how you intend to use it in the future.
This section outlines the context for the research and the approach that was undertaken.
This section presents energy statistics including supply and demand by fuel types, energy balance tables, pricing information, international comparisons and greenhouse gas emissions.
This section provides an overview of government-related broadband and mobile programmes.
This section provides information about consumer research and reports commissioned or undertaken in recent years.
This section provides information about reviews of consumer law we have conducted on behalf of the Government.
This section provides information about the all-of-government approach taken to combat online financial scams.
This section provides information, resources and guidance on our cross-government functions of dispute resolution, regulatory stewardship, government procurement and property and language assistance services.
This section provides information, resources and guidance on our functions which support building and construction, tenancy and housing and energy and natural resources.
This section provides information, resources and guidance on our functions which support consumers, employment, business and economic development.
This section provides information, resources and guidance on our functions which support immigration and tourism.
This section provides information, resources and guidance on our functions which support science and technology.
This section relates to the laws on how entities, including companies, incorporated societies, building societies and limited partnerships, are created, administered and wound up.
This section sets out details of the proposed simplified points system and seeks feedback on its workability.
This section sets out information about the investigation of building failures under the Building Act 2004.
This section sets out the events that have received funding from the ETSP to date.
This series of reports provides rich information and analysis of a range of tourism issues. Reports currently available are the:
This service is available 7 days a week
This statement applies to information gathered by us, our employees, contractors, or any other third parties engaged by us, including any of these engaged locally and/or working offshore. We require any third party that is carrying out information gathering on our behalf to comply with the obligations of MBIE employees.
This strategy is set to expire in mid-2022.
This study followed a group of over 1,000 adult New Zealanders from March 2021 to March 2022 to track changes in consumer concerns, attitudes and experiences.
This summary provides more detailed information on the changes and what the changes mean for adventure activity operators.
This system specifies who can do building work and how to do it. It also provides checks and offers consumer protections.
This theme focuses on advancing environmental resiliency and sustainability through science, technology, and innovation that centres on diverse perspectives, and promotes an inclusive scientific ecosystem. Unlocking the diversity of thought and experience can expand the boundaries of scientific knowledge, which is vital to fundamental research and underpins resilient and sustainable solutions to global environmental and societal challenges.
This transparency statement explains how the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) gathers information for regulatory compliance, law enforcement and protective security purposes. MBIE gathers information for these purposes in order to keep people in New Zealand safe and prevent harm by:
This updated vision broadens the focus of He Kai Kei Aku Ringa 2013 to include prosperity and wellbeing.
This use case, along with selected digital twin examples from New Zealand, was presented to a business and government audience in November 2023. The recording and report from the workshop are available here.
This was a highly competitive process. The evaluation criteria, used to select candidates to be put forward for consideration by NASA, included:
This webpage is currently being updated
This website contains information obtained from within the New Zealand Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, from third party sources and websites, and from sources commissioned by us, and is subject to change without notice.
This website will be updated with more information as the Government makes progress through its agenda.
This will not impact existing employment agreements, which will continue to operate as normal.
This work is aimed at helping reposition the industry for the future and ensuring that businesses are safeguarded in the short-term. In addition, funding has been put aside for anchor projects to boost tourism.
This work is licensed under a
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 New Zealand Licence
This work makes it easier for New Zealand exporters to trade with other countries, maintains fair market competition, and ensures that products imported into New Zealand are safe.
This work will significantly enhance the spatial resolution of the outputs from MethaneSAT and its usefulness to end users and offshore meat and dairy products.
Three Years On: English and employment outcomes of former refugees
Three interns completed remote internships with NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) as part of the Visiting Student Research Program during 2021 and 2022. See what our JPL interns have to say about their experiences here:
Thriving industries and regions
Through Curious Minds, the Government support activities, projects and programmes that work with communities, businesses and educators to boost engagement between science, technology and society. Curious Minds encourages all New Zealanders to ask good questions, solve local problems and uncover innovative science and technology solutions for a brighter future.
Through SpaceOps New Zealand, Robin has been responsible for growing a pipeline of engineers and employees who have the necessary skills and experience to deliver future impact.
Through its Urban Cycleway Programme, Waka Kotahi - the New Zealand Transport Agency has co-funded the building of a number of on-road and off-road cycleways. The cycleways make it easier and safer for cyclists to move through our urban centres.
Through the Network Expansion Project, a series of on-road cycle touring routes were added to the New Zealand Cycle Trails network. These are known as the Heartland and Connector Rides.
Through the Provincial Growth Fund, the government seeks to ensure that people living all over New Zealand can reach their full potential by helping build a regional economy that is sustainable, inclusive and productive
Through this research, we found several ways to appeal to Pacific Peoples and promote financial capability programmes in the Pacific community, for example:
Throughout consultation, general comments on the current operation of the RSE scheme and the nature of the policy review process were received.
Thursday 1 May 2025 until Wednesday 12 noon, 2 July 2025
Tianyi developed a computer simulation to mimic the process of communication between cells.
Ticket reselling in New Zealand
Timeframe for sick leave accumulation In 2020 Cabinet agreed that, rather than the current six-month waiting period, eligible employees would begin to accumulate sick leave entitlement from the first day of employment. The intent of this change was to recognise that employees have little control over when they may need to take sick leave and may need to take it during their first six months of employment.
Timeline and key documents for the Customer and Product Data Act
Timely responses will be provided to the complainant.
To access older building and construction consultations, please contact our Building System Performance branch.
To access older health and safety consultations, email us:
To achieve my vision for tourism, the system must be regenerative, giving back more to people and places than it takes. Tourism must actively enrich our communities (contribute to the health and wellbeing of all our diverse communities) and help protect and restore our environment. Our visitors must become Brand New Zealand storytellers and New Zealand must be recognised for our unique experiences and welcoming communities.
To achieve the vision for tourism and transition the sector to a more regenerative model where our unique stories can be brought to life, we need to build more meaningful partnerships.
To achieve this, several changes will be made to the 3 key steps in the personal grievance process:
To apply, candidates must meet the following eligibility criteria:
To assist our collation and analysis of submissions we have provided an optional submission template.
To be completed by quality assurers: Quality Assurance Reviewing Agency: The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment .
To be eligible for the Scheme, travel must have been confirmed on or before 14 August 2020 and be for travel overseas.
To be eligible, people will need to have worked or been on statutory parental leave for at least six months in the past 18 months. New Zealand citizens and residents will be eligible for insurance payments.
To be eligible, someone must stop working entirely or experience a reduction in their capacity to work by at least 50%. The health condition or disability must be expected to last for at least four weeks. Any health issues shorter than this should be addressed with sick leave and other leave options.
To better support and incentivise innovation for future economic growth, Callaghan Innovation will be disestablished and its most important functions will be redistributed to other parts of the science, innovation and technology system.
To build the best nitrous engines in the world, there are knowledgeable gaps to fill and a lot of the new research to conduct. We've made significant strides in our understanding of the thermal properties of nitrous oxide through scientific cooperation with DLR, which is very cool.
To change any of your registration information, complete a change of details on postal register form (PO3):
To comply with this policy, an acceptable version (as specified below) must be deposited either:
To contact the dedicated migrant exploitation team, contact MBIE on 0800 20 00 88 (Monday to Friday, 8.00am-5.30pm (excluding public holidays))
To date, over 200 tourism projects worth over $500 million have been funded through the Provincial Growth Fund
To do this, MBIE has engaged Deloitte Access Economics and Space Trailblazer to perform an economic analysis of the New Zealand space and advanced aviation sectors.
To ensure the sustainability of the tourism sector, we need to develop and promote high-quality, authentic visitor experiences that draw on manaakitanga, our unique visitor proposition of our people and our place and tell our stories in way that engages and enlightens.
To facilitate efficient payments to you for the goods and/or services you supply, please provide us with the following Taxable Supply Information:
To find out about their projects and experiences watch their Vlogs
To increase the impact and the innovation potential of our public investment in research, our Open Research policy enables free online access for everyone to MBIE funded peer-reviewed research publications.
To learn about previously issued HAV licences, see the summary below:
To learn about previously issued payload permits, see the summary below:
To make sure we got the Tourism Strategy right, we ran a public consultation over summer 18/19.
To make this data open and more usable we consulted with stakeholders and agreed the format for these reports. A schema is also provided to help you navigate and interpret the data.
To make this happen, over $2.5 billion in Crown funding has already been allocated to roll out world-leading communications infrastructure through multiple connectivity programmes including:
To massively oversimplify, the 2 things that matter with rocket engines are how well the propellants burn and how hot the engine gets. Our work has broadly focused on these 2 areas and we're already putting the learnings into practice to improve the performance of our thrusters. While there is a lot of data available that describes the heat transfer properties of various liquids, there is nothing specific for N2O.
To position New Zealand for future success, MBIE needs to focus on:
To preserve anonymity where there is a small count of people the data has been random rounded to base 3. This means that:
To provide clarity, MBIE published a briefing outlining the process used by officials to assess national interest implications for permits and licences issued under the Outer Space and High-altitude Activities Act 2017.
To qualify, the job must end. A reduction in hours worked at the job is not an event that is covered by the scheme.
To receive occasional updates and information by email subscribe to the topics of interest.
To reduce wait times for building inspections, BCAs will be required to carry out 80% of inspections within 3 working days. MBIE will produce new guidance for BCAs to help them meet this requirement.
To remain fit for purpose, successful destinations regularly revise, review and re-engineer their plans, activities and structures to respond to changing visitor or community needs and the macro- and microeconomic influences.
To report a case anonymously: call Crimestoppers on 0800 555 111 or complete the Online Crimestoppers form.
To report anonymously, call Crime Stoppers on 0800 555 111 or make an anonymous report on the Crime Stoppers website:
To report migrant exploitation online, fill out the form Reporting migrant exploitation on the Employment New Zealand website:
To report people trafficking, call New Zealand Police 105 or 111 (if it is an emergency).
To report workplace exploitation, contact the MBIE Service Centre on 0800 20 90 20.
To respond to the Taskforce's recommendations, we developed
To see all closed consultations relating to building go to:
To see the Act and other documents regarding its origins and its continued evolution, see below:
To see what Building-related consultations are currently open visit:
To support researchers and future funding applicants better understand the New Zealand research landscape we release Australian and New Zealand Standard Research Classification (ANZSRC) data relating to successful funding applications. Currently this information is limited to Endeavour Fund successful applications only.
To support the preselection process, candidates were asked to specify in the application form up to 2 topics from the list below of the subject areas that relate most closely to their current field of study.
To support these principles, the applicant should look to have some public safety goals. There should be clear line of sight through the organisation as to who is responsible for achieving these goals. These goals should: ȓ combine lead and lag indicators; ȓ be measurable; and ȓ be reported on. Together the principles and goals should help drive behaviours that ensure public safety. Safety Critical Systems and Safety Assessment
To support this process, MBIE brought together a working group of stakeholders including payroll system providers, payroll practitioners working in employer organisations, business, and unions.
To what extent do adventure activities in New Zealand experience risks from natural hazards? What activities face risks of catastrophic harm if natural hazards are not managed appropriately?
Together with Stats NZ and other organisations, we produce a range of data about the tourism industry.
Tohu media looked to protect intellectual property of indigenous media through creation of an AI-powered content system.
Tologa Bay Innovation TecHub
Tom Cruise in action in the South Island of New Zealand for the filming of Mission: Impossible - Fallout.
Tool allow to compare a wide range of economic indicators for the various regions of New Zealand
Toolkit for community (former refugees, migrants, NGOs, settlement service providers etc.)
Toolkit for government agencies
Topics of successful grant applications for the 2023 IRF funding round were as follows:
Total Tourism Recovery Package Budget
Total available to promote event
Total cost of the project
Total funds committed to the Tourism Recovery Package
Total hours spent on prosecution11 Cost of Prosecution12 Expenses (if any)
Total underspend of the Tourism Recovery Package
Touring music and international acts
Tourism & Events Queensland
Tourism Advisory Support Service & Digital Capability
Tourism Communities: Support, Recovery and Re-set Plan
Tourism Data Leadership Group
Tourism Data Leadership Group initial report
Tourism Data Leadership Group sector updates
Tourism Data Partnership Fund
Tourism Data Partnership Fund: Application form
Tourism Electronic Card Transactions
Tourism Electronic Card Transactions (TECTs)
Tourism Evidence and Insights Centre
Tourism Funding Toolkit for Local Government Revenue
Tourism Futures Taskforce
Tourism Growth Partnership
Tourism Industry Aotearoa
Tourism Industry Association
Tourism Industry Transformation Plan
Tourism Industry Transformation Plan (ITP)
Tourism Infrastructure Fund
Tourism Infrastructure Fund opens on 11 April
Tourism Infrastructure Fund panel
Tourism Kick-start Fund opens on 1 April
Tourism New Zealand Domestic Demand Review
Tourism New Zealand also continued to keep the 100% Pure New Zealand brand alive in the hearts and minds of our international visitors and have now resumed international marketing activity to encourage booking and travel to New Zealand. You can explore their work on their website.
Tourism New Zealand initiatives
Tourism New Zealand is currently focused on four priorities to support transition to a regenerative tourism system:
Tourism New Zealand is responsible for marketing New Zealand- Aotearoa as a visitor destination for the long-term benefit of New Zealanders.
Tourism New Zealand is the trading name of the New Zealand Tourism Board. It is the Crown entity responsible for marketing New Zealand to the world as a visitor destination.
Tourism New Zealand undertook a range of activity aimed at encouraging domestic visitation during the pandemic, including the 'Do Something New, New Zealand' campaign.
Tourism New Zealand will carry out the marketing activities, which will focus initially on encouraging visitors from Australia, USA, China, India, Germany and Korea. It will start rolling out immediately to increase international arrivals around the regions through winter, spring and into early next year.
Tourism Recovery Package documents
Tourism Sustainability Commitment
Tourism Transitions Programme
Tourism also needs the social licence to operate and be underpinned by a sustainable funding model.
Tourism and hospitality sector focused
Tourism and hospitality workforce report
Tourism businesses in the 5 South Island communities most reliant on international visitors will be able to apply for support from the $49 million Tourism Kick-start Fund initiative on 1 April.
Tourism data co-governance
Tourism data sources diagram
Tourism employment earnings and filled jobs
Tourism funding toolkit [PDF 3.1MB]
Tourism infrastructure report
Tourism is integral to economic development and is a key driver and tool to achieve wider economic development goals. DM and visitor attraction strategies can play a role in building the reputation of a region/place and attracting new residents, businesses and students.
Tourism marketing boost in key countries
Tourism operators do not need to be registered with Qualmark to access this support.
Tourism operators provided extra support
Tourism protects, restores and champions Aotearoa New Zealand's natural environment, culture and historic heritage
Tourism research and data
Tourism sector productivity improves
Tourism supports thriving and sustainable regions
Tourism turbocharge takes New Zealand to the world
Tourism was one of our largest and fastest growing sectors in 2019, but was severely impacted by COVID-19. The Government has invested heavily to support the sector through the pandemic and the border reopening means the sector can begin to recover. We are looking forward to welcoming visitors back to New Zealand-Aotearoa.
Tourism was selected for an ITP because of its significance to the New Zealand economy, and because the loss of international visitors as the result of COVID-19 gives us an opportunity to rebuild a more regenerative tourism system. Funding for the development of the Tourism ITP was included in the Tourism Communities: Support, Recovery and Re-set Plan.
Tourism: briefing for the incoming Minister 2016 [PDF 3.1MB]
Towards a Circular Economy: Implications for Emission Reduction and Environmental Sustainability
Towards an energy strategy for New Zealand
Track record in managing contracts for similar goods/services. Supplier track record in delivering similar goods or services.
Tracking seals from outer space
Trade agreements and closer economic partnerships are an important part of New Zealand's international trade policy.
Trade agreements and partnerships
Trade agreements are an important driver for sustainable growth in Aotearoa New Zealand and in our partner countries.
Trade implications for New Zealand
Trade remedies application and investigation guide
Trade remedies under trade agreements
Trade remedy investigations
Tradeable goods and services are a product of labour. Each free trade negotiation that Aotearoa New Zealand engages on seeks to reinforce International Labour Organization member commitments, and address labour rights and labour issues.
Tradepersons licensing and skills
Training initiatives delivered with domestic and international partners at the ASEAN Transnational Organised Crime course at the Jakarta Centre for Law Enforcement Cooperation (JCLEC) most recently in October 2022.
Trans Power New Zealand Ltd
Trans-Tasman Earth observation research studies confirmed
Transforming the foundations of the tourism system
Transition Fund for Local Authorities
Transitional period for privately owned vehicles will be extended by one year to 7 June 2026
Transitioning to a more circular economy (2023)
Transitioning to a regenerative tourism model
Transitions and retention
Transitions have traditionally disadvantaged some groups more than others. In a just transition, this is acknowledged and incorporated into planning to make the transition more fair, equitable and inclusive.
Translating and multilingual document formatting
Transmitting data across vast distances inevitably leads to losses and degradation - unless you can break up the journey.
Transparency and consistency: Honesty and openness about what is involved in the review, including an evaluation of the framework against these objectives as soon as practicable after implementation of the review
Transport service licence on New Zealand Transport Agency's website
Transportation between hotel to the Summit venue (i.e. no airport transfers)
Travel Agents Association
Treasury's principles for best practice regulations
Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons
Trends in the importation of building and construction products
Trusted Research: Guidance for Institutions and Researchers [PDF 4MB]
Trustees are advised by a Steering Group consisting of the Chief Executive of the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) or nominee, the Chief Executive of Business NZ or nominee, and the Secretary of the CTU.
Try entering school competitions that will help develop your STEM skills, such as the Design a Satellite Mission essay competition. Participate in initiatives like The Wonder Project or explore resources from the Science Learning Hub. These are designed to inspire young Kiwis like you in STEM.
Tui Project: decommissioning the Tui oil field
Turning now to Biocosmetics, we do a few pages from the Biocosmetics Report.
Turning now to Sports Nutrition, the third of the 3 reports, and again we are just giving you a teaser of all of these.
Turning now to capabilities, this is just a brief teaser on situation looking at the wider capabilities, as I said before the core of this that you have to have a functioning market bioeconomy, then around that we as a wider society, as government, we need smart people, good ideas and useful capital to push on that.
Turning to aquaculture production, New Zealand aquaculture production has grown to around and up to 2004, growth has stalled since and all new species attempted in the last 50 years have failed.
Turning to driving growth or change, what are the drivers of an internationally competitive bioeconomy? This comes out of some work we did in Australia a few years ago but you have got to have available resources, you have land, water labour and inputs. You then have to be able to produce biomass, process it, handle it, and have access to markets. The Government often talks about this, but it cannot drive the core of it, that is driven by industry.
Twelve months to re-negotiate contracts before income threshold policy takes effect
Two key examples of partnership in the tourism space are:
Two key government initiatives underway that will drive some of those foundational changes are:
Two reviews undertaken by MBIE and DIA in 2016 and 2015 respectively found that while Government-funded interpreting and translation services are available in New Zealand, a number of barriers and gaps prevent equitable access to public services and information for people with limited English language proficiency.
UC Aerospace, one of the largest academic clubs at the University of Canterbury is aiming to make Canterbury a hub for aerospace talent by building career pathways for students. The club runs multiple outreach programmes at both primary and high-school levels to grow student interest in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Maths) and rocketry.
UFB users can access speeds of close to 1,000 Megabits per second. This allows them to use business applications to improve productivity, access educational and entertainment content and a whole range of other benefits.
UFB uses fibre optic cables to deliver fibre-to-the-premises. It is most suitable in urban areas with higher population densities. It is superior to the copper technology that was rolled out in New Zealand over the last century.
UN Registration Convention
US Energy Information Administration
Ultra-Fast Broadband (UFB) is being rolled out across New Zealand in partnership with a number of different fibre companies.
Ultra-fast broadband initiative - Amendment to model
Ultra-fast broadband regulatory regime
UltraFast Broadband Limited Fibre Deed
Uncertain about how to identify potential collaborators?
Uncluttered launch windows, great location for ground infrastructure and ideal environment for earth observation data calibration and validation.
Under section 18 of the Outer Space and High-altitude Activities Act 2017, a permit holder must comply with any other conditions that the Minister considers necessary or desirable in order to:
Under the 2013 iteration, the terms of the Deed were scheduled to be reviewed by 1 November 2018. The timeframe has been extended and a review is currently underway.
Under the Children's Act 2014, MBIE will review this Child Protection Policy every 3 years.
Under the Contact Code telecommunications service providers offering home phone services must:
Under the Privacy Act 2020, you can ask any organisation or business for information they hold about you and to correct it if it is wrong. This right extends to small and large businesses, government departments, schools, sports clubs, charities, and community groups. The OPC will ask you if you have tried to resolve the matter with us directly first and will also consider whether you have any other remedy available. The OPC may look into your complaint and make a recommendation to us regarding the concern you have raised.
Under the Prostitution Reform Act 2003, foreign nationals on temporary visas (including visitor, student, or work visas) in New Zealand are unable to work in the sex industry. People may be made liable for deportation if they have been found to have breached this condition. Under the Immigration Act 2009, people unlawfully in New Zealand may not work in New Zealand.
Under the RBI, the Government will subsidise some rural telecommunications services and offer these services to priority users at a lower price than the same, or similar, services are provided over the same network to other customers.
Under the Telecommunications (New Regulatory Framework) Amendment Act 2018, the TSOs which apply to Chorus and Spark will cease to apply in areas which have fibre. Consumers in these areas will have access to affordable fibre-based landline and broadband services.
Under the Telecommunications Act 2001, the Commerce Commission can investigate after 2023 whether the unbundled fibre service should be regulated. It can then recommend to the Minister for Communications that price caps should be introduced for the product, together with technical specifications and conditions for the service
Under the agreement, New Zealand agencies preserve their full existing powers and functions, such as border control, health and safety, and accident investigation, by way of a Side Arrangement.
Under the current Act, payments
Under the current law, if a personal grievance is established, the Employment Relations Authority or Employment Court may grant one or more of the following remedies to the employee:
Under the new law, territorial authorities can introduce local polices for shop trading in their entire district or in limited areas on Easter Sunday.
Under this policy, a complaint may be made about the:
Undergraduate study in Data Science
Understanding dispute resolution
Understanding seasonality in domestic leisure tourism demand [PDF 598KB]
Understanding the Construction Contracts Act 2002
Understanding variation in tourism spend
Undertake awareness raising and training
Undertaking National Interest Risk Review
Underutilisation in the labour force
Unfair commercial practices
Unite Union/New Zealand Council of Trade Unions
Unitec Institute of Technology
United Kingdom-New Zealand Free Trade Agreement (2023)
United Nations Act 1946 and sanctions regulations
United Nations Convention on Registration of Objects launched into Outer Space: proposed accession [PDF 585KB]
Universities New Zealand TR-PSR guidance
University club helps launch students into aerospace careers
University of Auckland Research Team
University of Canterbury Aerospace Club
University of Canterbury antimicrobial research receives Gold, again!
University partners with industry to grow space workforce
Unlawful postal activities
Unless indicated otherwise for specific items or collections of content (either below or within specific items or collections), this copyright material is licensed for re-use under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International Licence.
Unless otherwise indicated, the material we make available on our social media accounts is protected by Crown copyright. You can reproduce this Crown copyright material free of charge without further permission, as long as you:
Unless we have lawful reason for withholding this information, it will be made available if you request access to a transcript or copy of your call by emailing the Privacy Officer at
Unlocking Curious Minds contestable fund
Unlocking New Zealand's potential
Unresolved conflict and substandard dispute resolution is socially and financially costly. The direct cost of employment disputes alone has been indicatively estimated at $440 million per annum. The full costs of all types of disputes to government, parties and society are considerable, and are a significant impediment to economic prosperity.
Unsolicited Electronic Messages Act 2007
Until any changes to the Holidays Act go through the Parliamentary process and come into force, all of the existing rules still apply. This means that employers still need to comply with the current Holidays Act, and ensure they are providing the correct entitlements and payments to employees.
Up to $8 million is available annually for the maintenance, development and promotion of the New Zealand Cycle Trails (NZCT).
Up to $8 million is available annually for the maintenance, development and promotion of the New Zealand Cycle Trails to ensure they remain a high-quality tourism asset.
Up until the point of transfer of these activities, Callaghan Innovation will as far as possible continue to administer these programmes as it would under normal circumstances, in accordance with the relevant legislation and Ministerial directions.
UpStart Nation is a report for the Government on how to best support a thriving environment for startups in New Zealand.
Upcoming changes to the employer-assisted temporary work visa system include:
Upcoming milestones (Quarter 1 2023)
Update on Budget initiatives for Regional Development portfolio [PDF 520KB]
Update on Industry Transformation Plans [PDF 952KB]
Update on industry transformation plans
Update on industry transformation plans - Minute of Decision
Update on science reforms: CRI mergers and Callaghan Innovation
Update the maximum and minimum liable earnings to reflect movement in the Statistics New Zealand Labour Cost Index.
Updated Ministry of Social Development Sectors
Updated people trafficking training available to all MBIE staff
Updates on our work in the energy and resources sector
Updates on the 3 business initiatives
Updating Accident Compensation Review Costs Regulations
Updating the national interest assessment process [PDF 151KB]
Upgrades and renewals on the existing Great Rides.
Upgrading telecommunication infrastructure
Urdu: Ask for an interpreter [JPG 345KB]
Urgent scientific research and data collection
Use community providers, clear obligations and targeted incentives to get young people off welfare and into work. (MSD)
Use of personal information
Use of recycled materials
Use the subscription page on the Statistics New Zealand website to receive alerts on International travel (including international visitor arrivals).
Use this template to complete your reporting requirements for the Horizon Europe Top-Up Fund.
Use this template to submit your feedback on the Review of New Zealand Companies Office Fees and Levies (2025).
Use this template to understand all the terms and conditions of the contract if you are successful
Useful supporting evidence that could be provided in support of the safety case submission can include audit and assurance plans, details of incident and accident reporting systems, a ‘Just Culture’ policy, audit and investigation frameworks etc. Emergency Management Planning The emergency management plan must be specific to the operation and cover the full range of activities that could result in an emergency. It needs to be: ȓ carefully considered; ȓ implemented; and ȓ tested; ȓ reviewed and improved. ȓ communicated; To demonstrate that the emergency plan is fit for purpose applicants will need to demonstrate that they have: ȓ consulted with emergency services, key stakeholders ȓ considered how they will maintain effective and neighbouring operations that may be affected, equipment and ensure competency of personnel and the public; required to respond; and ȓ appropriate first response capability, equipment and ȓ identified potential emergency scenarios and that training for staff who will be immediately exposed; the response will be appropriate, regularly tested through rehearsals and any lessons learned willȓ considered and applied any relevant regulations, feedback and improve the plan 2.standards or codes; 2 This is not an exhaustive list of assurance activities. Each operation will need to demonstrate a consideration of assurance activity that is suitable to their unique circumstances. 7
User support within the dispute resolution scheme
Users' guide to the NESTF
Using new ideas, knowledge and technology to develop better ways of doing things helps the New Zealand economy grow.
Using the All Vacancies Index (AVI) as main indicator
Using these two building blocks they will store one photon of the entangled pair, allowing the other entangled photon to then be sent somewhere else in an entanglement-based quantum communication network.
Utilities (electricity, gas, or broadband property access)
Value is sustainably derived from the natural environment
Varying the Safety Case 9
Vector Communications Ltd
Vehicles with a portable toilet are no longer able to be certified self-contained. From December 2023 organisations could apply to become Certification Authorities.
Verification of Safety Systems – Assurance 8
Verification of Safety Systems – Assurance To ensure that operators keep the public safe, effective monitoring and assurance activity is essential. While mistakes are inevitable lessons must be learnt to avoid any problems from continuing and/or escalating. Operators need to know that the controls they have in place are functioning as intended, and be able to identify emerging risks early. An effective fit-for-purpose assurance system may give consideration to: ȓ incident/accident reporting and notification; ȓ safety system assessments; ȓ internal audits; ȓ quality assurance; and ȓ investigations; ȓ the ability and means to analyse data 2. An applicants safety case should demonstrate that the regulated party: ȓ has the appropriate monitoring systems in place ȓ the scope of the assurance activities covers the for the nature of the operation; breadth of the operation and will draw together information from various sources; andȓ has identified who is responsible for monitoring, that they are suitably qualified, empowered and ȓ can collate, analyse, report and act upon well resourced; the results to ensure the safety of the public – that any problems won’t be hiddenȓ knows how the monitoring activities will be and/or ignored.working and understand the safety critical nature of each component;
Version number 1.1 June 2024 Title: Prosecution Policy Date of Issue: July 2018 Dep Sec Sponsor: [Insert Deputy Secretary Title] Version: 1.1 Last Review: February 2024 Policy Owner: Chief Legal Officer Policy Classification : Operation al Next Review : February 2027 Security Classification: Unclassified Page 2 of 6 MBIE guiding principles relevant to this policy 1.1 The Prosecution Policy aligns with the following MBIE guiding principles: a. ensuring our core values and diverse and inclusi ve culture, including partnering with Māori, are at the heart of what we do b. ensuring we maintain the trust and confidence of the public c. ensuring the best use of taxpayer funds d. complying with legislation , regulations and standards . 2 Purpose 2.1 The purpose of the Prosecution Policy is to: a. establish the principles to which MBIE must adhere in dealing with potential prosecutions, making prosecution decisions and conducting prosecutions and/or related proceedings . b. define the expectations and rules governing prosecutions decision making and prosecution proceedings c. ensure effective internal controls are in place over the prosecution decision making process 3 Scop e 3.1 This policy applies to all staff, secondees and contractors employed or engaged on any basis by MBIE (our people) , whether they are casual, fixed term or permanent, whether full time or part time and whether they are in New Zealand or in any other count ry who is involved in prosecutions brought by MBIE, including those authorised to make a decision to prosecute . 3.2 For avoidance of doubt, the Prosecution Policy do es not apply to staff involved in civil enforcement (i.e. non -criminal or offence proceedings ) of MBIE legislation (e.g. before occupational licensing boards or the Employment Relations Authority). 3.3 This policy does not apply to personal grievances, disputes relating to employment within MBIE or offending by our people outside of their employment with MBIE. 4 Help 4.1 For any queries relating to the policy, please contact the Chief Legal Officer or Manager Legal Services ( Litigation) in the Legal, Ethics, and Privacy branch. 5 Definition of terms
Version number 1.1 June 2024 Title: Prosecution Procedure and Guidelines Date of Issue: July 2018 Security Classification Unclassified Version: 1.1 Review ed June 2024 Approved By: Chief Legal Officer Owner: Chief Legal Officer Page 2 of 16 1 Purpose 1.1 The purpose of this document is to set out the procedures and guidelines to be followed by MBIE staff in making a decision to prosecute or to request appeals. It also establishes standards to be met by prosecutors in any MBIE prosecution . 1.2 These Procedures and Guidelines must be read in conjunction with the Prosecution Policy . 2 Scope 2.1 These Procedures and Guidelines apply to: a. all MBIE staff authorised (whether as a statutory decision maker or acting under delegation) to make a decision to prosecute, or to take other actions in scope of the Prosecution Policy b. all MBIE staff involved in the preparation for, and conduct of, prosecutions brought by MBIE (whether under legislation administered by MBIE or other laws eg. the Crimes Act 1961) an d related court proceedings c. all prosecutors acting for MBIE and d. witnesses giving evidence in respect of their role as an MBIE employee or contractor, within any criminal proceedings . 2.2 These Procedures and Guidelines do not apply to staff involved in civil e nforcement of MBIE legislation (eg. before occupational licensing boards or the Employment Relations Authority). However, they may still provide useful guidance to such staff, particularly in relation to proceeding s in the Employment Court under Part 9A of the Employment Relations Act 2000 for a pecuniary penalty . 3 Definitions Term Definition Investigation In the context of this document, means investigation of potential criminal conduct. The term d oes not include a routine audit, inspection or complaint review unless after initial assessment (including relevant initial enquires), the investigator determin es to undertake further investigation that could lead to a criminal prosecution . Investigator Any employee (including those warranted under MBIE legislation) whose functions include investigation of suspected criminal offending .
Versions of a manuscript, journal article or conference paper that have not been refereed or peer-reviewed (e.g., preprints), are not acceptable for the purposes of this policy. However, MBIE welcomes the availability of preprints to facilitate early access to research outcomes and encourages the posting of preprints on preprint servers with open licensing.
Victoria University of Wellington
Video Interpreting Service
Video-assisted speech to speech
View MBIE's transparency statement
View all Official Information Act releases
View all closed Health and Safety consultations
View all closed consultations relating to energy
View all current Health and Safety consultations
View all data and analysis
View all labour market statistics snapshots
View all occasional papers
View all open consultations relating to energy
View all policy advice documents on Fair Pay Agreements
View all proactively released Cabinet papers and minutes in our Document Library
View all proactively released documents relating to the science sector reforms
View all the Briefings and associated documents from 2016
View all the Briefings and associated documents from 2017
View all the Briefings and associated documents from 2020
View all the documents released in this batch
View current and upcoming funding and investment opportunities.
View latest NZ Space Agency news
View more information on the Better Work phase of the ITP:
View more information on the Environment phase of the ITP:
View of the South Island of New Zealand from the International Space Station
View our closed consultations
View proactive release of documents relating to Immigration
View the High Court judgment and final orders on the Ministry of Justice website.
View the NESTF on the New Zealand Legislation website.
View the Telecommunications (Regulated Fibre Service Providers) Regulations 2019 on the New Zealand Legislation website.
View the discussion document:
View the highlights from past Summits
View the report and summary of Government actions
View the strategy and learn more about it.
View the web version of the Employment Action plan
View the web version of the summary of the discussion document:
View upcoming scheduled energy data releases.
View upcoming scheduled tourism data releases.
Visit business.govt.nz for tools and advice from government and industry to support the success of your business.
Visit institutes of higher learning and other prominent landmarks in Singapore.
Visit our Radio Spectrum Management website to find out about licensing, compliance, auctions and consumer information about electronic and radio products from overseas.
Visit the Civil Aviation Authority website for information on regulations for advanced aviation and emerging technologies.
Visit the Construction Sector Accord website
Visit the Digital Boost website for more details and how to register for this support:
Visit the New Zealand Space Agency website for information on space policy, regulation and sector development.
Visit the Tourism Evidence and Insights Centre to access tourism data, research and reports from a wide range of sources.
Visit the Utilities Disputes website for more information on dispute resolution or to raise a complaint with the Scheme.
Visit to find out how to apply for a visa or NZeTA, employ migrant workers, and assist students and refugees. You can also find out what you need to do to give immigration advice, and get information for medical professionals, carriers, and tourism and event organisations.
Visitors are also seeking greater connection and meaning from their travel experiences, wanting to immerse themselves more in communities and to connect with local people and cultures.
Vodafone Limited Rural Broadband Initiative Deed
Voluntary disclosure of personal information
VostroNet (New Zealand) Ltd
W e can ensure this is explained in the consultation document. We anticipate consultation would be open for 6 - 8 weeks
Waikato Regional Workforce Plan
Waimakariri District Council
Want to know when new labour market reports are released?
Watch a short vlog update from Mikhael Sayat. Mikhael was selected by NASA JPL from a shortlist of high-achieving students who applied for the New Zealand Space Scholarship.
Watch short vlogs from the 2023 New Zealand Space Scholarship recipients. This programme, administered by MBIE's New Zealand Space Agency, has seen 5 Kiwi interns travel to NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California, USA.
Watch their vlogs to find out more about their experiences:
Watch this space as we develop more resources for download.
Watch vlogs from New Zealand students on the internship of a lifetime.
We accept that our official responsibilities may affect the ways we engage in activities outside of work:
We act in the public interest and with a spirit of service to the community:
We act professionally at work and in our dealings with those with whom we work and serve:
We act with fairness, impartiality, courtesy, integrity and honesty in everything we do:
We adjusted the calculation of importer margins in September 2015 to include discounting activity. This adjustment has been carried back to October 2006.
We administer the New Zealand Business Number which is a free, globally unique identifier that makes it faster and easier for businesses to connect and interact.
We administer the safety-related provisions of the Electricity Act 1992 and Gas Act 1992 and associated safety regulations.
We advise government on aspects of the emergency call services in New Zealand, working with the New Zealand Police and other agencies.
We advise government on the allocation of New Zealand's radio spectrum and administer the Radiocommunications Act 1989 and supporting regulations.
We advise government on the allocation of New Zealand's radio spectrum and administer the Radiocommunications Act 1989.
We advise the government on resetting and rebuilding tourism on a sustainable and regenerative model of tourism. Regenerative tourism is about giving back more to people and places than it takes. It actively enriches our communities and helps protect and restore our environment. We provide support to the sector as it navigates difficult times, and we provide policy advice to support its recovery.
We also co-ordinate the development of electronic commerce policy across government to ensure the regulations facilitate use of electronic commerce and don't create barriers and cost to business.
We also established a consultation group representing migrants, businesses, unions and international students. The group has provided perspectives as the review developed ideas.
We also have a SI&T Memorandum of Cooperation with the State of Colorado, with a focus on collaboration in aerospace and geothermal technologies.
We also intend to grow our satellite design and manufacturing capability and our space science, technology and engineering research activity.
We also manage the Government Property Portal (GPP). GPP has property and lease, asset, space and facilities management modules as well as reporting capabilities that help agencies manage their property better.
We also proposed that you issue an exposure draft of the Bill, in order to seek feedback and test its
We also strengthen New Zealand's science and innovation links at the multilateral level through participation in the following international organisations and groups.
We also used to produce the Food and Beverage Directory which is discontinued for the time being.
We analysed the submissions and provided advice to the Government based on the feedback from this consultation.
We anticipate that this information will also connect to and support the New Zealand Research Information System currently under development.
We are a founding signatory to the 2020 Algorithm charter for Aotearoa New Zealand, and are committed to using our algorithms in an ethical and transparent way.
We are also the monitoring agency for the Financial Markets Authority and the Commission for Financial Capability.
We are an attractive location for space activities.
We are an incredibly diverse organisation, employing over 4,000 people across a range of roles, and all sharing a commitment to grow New Zealand for all.
We are changing the way employers recruit some migrants for temporary work in New Zealand.
We are clear on how we make decisions.
We are committed to ensuring that our policy and planning processes, as well as our administration of the national Register of Radio Frequencies, licensing, compliance and enforcement, and radio frequency interference (RFI) investigation, are fast, simple and effective, and maximise the use of online services wherever possible.
We are committed to leading the world in space and advanced aviation regulation
We are committed to open government and improving practices around the proactive release and publishing of official information.
We are committed to providing a good experience to our customers. When you interact with us, we promise it will be
We are committed to the safe, responsible, and peaceful use of space. Applicants for permits and licences must meet requirements of the Outer Space and High-altitude Activities (Licences and Permits) Regulations 2017 (the Regulations). They may also need to meet requirements relating to other regulatory regimes, like those for health and safety, hazardous substances, environmental impacts, and radio spectrum use. Information about these other requirements is below.
We are committed to understanding and promoting diversity in science and research.
We are committed to understanding and promoting diversity in science and research. We believe that everyone should have a fair and equal opportunity to participate in the science system to their fullest potential. It is our intent that this data is used to inform a pathway to equity in the science system and enable it to better reflect the diversity of Aotearoa.
We are completing work that may result in changes in New Zealand in response to various international financial market reforms.
We are consulting on updated Minerals and Petroleum Programmes to reflect recent and proposed amendments to the Crown Minerals Act 1991.
We are continuing to work on the details of these proposals
We are currently reviewing the data sources and methods used to derive national average prices. Care should be taken in using the pricing data, particularly for data since the start of February 2025.
We are going to talk about one of the 30 in detail just give you a feel about how the process works. We are looking at Essential Oils Manufacturing/Distilling.
We are inclusive, respectful and responsive in our dealings with all people regardless of their position, personal characteristics or situation:
We are inviting proposals for joint research partnerships between New Zealand and Chinese research organisations for activities that demonstrate benefits for New Zealand by collaborating with world-class partners in China.
We are looking to improve data, including developing a way to determine a reliable annual figure for business expenditure on research and development (BERD). The Government hopes to increase BERD with the right policy settings.
We are making 2 main contributions to the MethaneSAT mission:
We are open with MBIE and disclose any commercial activities, financial, employment, personal interests or relationships that might cause an actual, perceived or potential conflict of interest:
We are professional and objective in our language, actions and interactions:
We are proposing 5 key changes to how the Companies Office recovers costs:
We are proposing changes to attract and retain migrants with the medium- to long-term skills New Zealand needs. The changes are designed to align with the Immigration Rebalance and give more certainty to migrant workers and their families.
We are proposing the following key changes to the Skilled Migrant Category.
We are proposing to introduce a simplified points system that sets a clear, fair, and transparent eligibility threshold for skilled residence.
We are publishing MBIE documents that underpin decisions for Budget 2024.
We are publishing proposal and decision documents for MBIE departmental changes dated from August 2023 onwards.
We are releasing documents which relate to the Tourism Recovery Package. The webpage will be updated periodically.
We are responsible for a range of policy and regulations that control and facilitate broadband and mobile infrastructure, including property access and dispute resolution for UFB installations, and environmental standards.
We are responsible for a range of policy and regulations that control and facilitate broadband and mobile infrastructure.
We are responsible for maintaining a robust regulatory environment for the information and communications technology (ICT) sector.
We are responsible for maintaining a robust regulatory environment for the telecommunications sector.
We are responsible for the delivery of advice, regulation and services that have a real impact on people, businesses and the environment within which they operate.
We are responsible for the maintenance and review of charters for our regulatory systems.
We are seeking expressions of interest for the board positions as set out below.
We are seeking feedback on telecommunications regulatory issues that may impact businesses and consumers.
We are strengthening access to official information by publishing responses to Departmental Official Information Act (OIA) requests of public interest.
We are taking a proactive approach to ensure employers, facilitators of service and workers in the sex industry understand their rights and legal obligations.
We are working to ensure that the retail payment system operates in the interests of New Zealand consumers and businesses.
We are working with other agencies and data providers to further develop this methodology to ensure that it is fit for purpose.
We are working with the Department of Internal Affairs to advance the new direction for water services and policy based on Local Water Done Well.
We are working with the Ministry for the Environment and the Energy Efficiency and Conservation Authority to reduce emissions from the industry sector and process heat through energy efficiency and fuel switching.
We are working with the Parliamentary Counsel Office (PCO) to revise Acts and make them more accessible, readable and easier to understand.
We believe New Zealand can become a significant player in the global commercial space launch industry. However, the opportunities for New Zealand are much broader than launch activities.
We believe a New Zealand Income Insurance Scheme could be an important step-change that lets us manage the challenges and harness the opportunities that lie ahead for New Zealand.
We cannot enter into any discussion related to politics.
We cannot give you this permission.
We carry out assessments of our regulatory systems to see how well they are performing.
We carry out periodic reviews of the Commerce Act to ensure it reflects modern regulatory practice and continues to deliver benefits to New Zealanders.
We carry out weekly monitoring of importer margins for regular petrol, premium petrol and automotive diesel. This data is updated weekly, using the previous week's data.
We collect information from a wide variety of sources in both physical and digital environments. These sources may include: individuals (via in-person interview, telephone call, observation) (voluntary and compulsory); information from online open sources (including websites, social media, apps, and public registers); information from physical sources and locations (e.g. paper records, site visits, inspections); other agencies or entities (e.g. New Zealand government agencies, private sector companies, banks, overseas governments and agencies); information gathered from technical and scientific devices (including biometric information collection, technical measurement devices).
We collect, analyse and publish New Zealand tourism data, along with a range of useful tools and publications.
We conduct interviews and workshops with people involved in all parts of the system at all levels. The feedback from system participants is then mapped against a set of assessment criteria based on lessons/experience and other good regulatory practice guidance.
We consider the combination of our guidance (Practice advisory 19) and industry-led initiatives have improved awareness of requirements to restrain non-structural elements.
We consulted on possible options to introduce a disclosure of origin requirement in the patents regime.
We consulted with the New Zealand Telecommunications Forum (TCF) and other industry stakeholders on the open access obligations that would bind Vodafone under the RBI. We received 8 submissions.
We consulted with the public, and received feedback through written submissions and meetings held around New Zealand:
We continue to update this list as the research landscape evolves.
We contribute to a number of international energy fora that aim to develop a better understanding of underlying energy issues affecting the world.
We contributed to effective regulatory stewardship by supporting schemes to learn from disputes and improve how dispute resolution services are designed and delivered.
We could also use the consultation document to ask targeted questions about alternative entitlement systems 62. An element of c omplexity within a week s-based entitlement system is inevitable t o provide certainty and clarity about how the rules apply across all working arrangements . 63. During the Taskforce’s consultation process, many stakeholders (particularly businesses and payroll providers) called for a more
We currently have a number of roles available. Read more about our people or take a look at our vacancies.
We deliver a range of data, statistics, modelling, research and analytical papers.
We deliver on these objectives through our 2 external facing brands:
We deliver the Ministry's procurement and property functional leadership objectives through a collaborative, centre-led approach.
We develop charters and work with the other core agencies to ensure they are comfortable with the charter for their regulatory system. The charter confers no obligation on the core agencies, but records an understanding between them about their respective roles and functions in their regulatory system.
We develop policy and law to support a trading environment that promotes the long-term interests of consumers. This page provides information about recent research and reviews of consumer law.
We develop space policy and strategy
We developed the Briefing through 2 phases of public consultation
We developed the Strategy along with WorkSafe New Zealand with a range of stakeholders. It is informed by research and public consultation on the draft Strategy.
We developed these changes with help from an expert reference group of mining, health and safety and regulatory experts from New Zealand and abroad.
We don't have statutory power to decline to register postal identifiers that include copyrighted words or trademarks. Nor do we check proposed postal identifiers against the trademark database.
We enable space-related business, science and innovation
We encourage local authorities to be mindful that it may take time for the public to become familiar with the new rules when considering issuing infringements or fines.
We encourage payload permit applicants to comply with industry best practices for preserving uses of the night sky.
We encourage the use of the Creative Commons Attribution licence (CC-BY), permitting free use and reuse subject only to proper attribution.
We encourage you to protect your personal privacy and that of others when using social media, and to take into account the public nature of most social media. Where our social media channels are run by third parties we encourage you to read their privacy policy as well as their terms of use.
We engage independent external boards to help shape and guide our work.
We ensure our actions are not affected by our personal interests or relationships:
We have a central role in governing, monitoring and advising on the gas market to ensure that gas is delivered in a safe, efficient, fair, reliable and environmentally sustainable manner.
We have a central role in monitoring and advising on energy markets to ensure that electricity, gas and liquid fuel are delivered in a safe, efficient, fair, reliable and environmentally sustainable manner.
We have a presence on Twitter, Facebook, YouTube, LinkedIn and Instagram. We encourage you to read the terms of use before engaging with us on these channels.
We have a proven track record of space and aviation innovation
We have a wide range of information, guides, and resources available for government agencies and communities regarding the Language Assistance Services programme.
We have a wide range of operational websites that provide information about specific services and subject areas.
We have a work programme of strategic advice and policy development that includes assessment of, and advice on:
We have approved a range of payloads for launch from New Zealand and this diversity is shown below by country, owner, purpose and size of all payloads up to 31 December 2024.
We have awarded Gold Status for research excellence to a project that is revolutionising the way x-ray technology will detect, diagnose and monitor many diseases, including cancer.
We have been gathering data and information on the economic impact and recovery options of COVID-19, and data and statistics about managed isolation and quarantine in New Zealand.
We have bilateral agreements with the United States Government and with the European Space Agency.
We have completed the 2018 Monitoring Report which reports on progress with amendments to the Residential Tenancies Act made in June 2016.
We have conducted regulatory system assessments for the following systems:
We have created an online toolkit that provides practical guidance for policy-makers and regulators about the opportunities, options and success factors for international regulatory cooperation. The toolkit includes case studies which show the lessons learnt from the different approaches to international regulatory cooperation.
We have customers asking us to support advanced deep-space missions like GTO (Geostationary Transfer Orbit) and GEO (Geostationary Orbit) transfers, Lunar, Mars and asteroid insertions. These high-performance missions benefit substantially from every last percent of performance so, naturally, there is a desire to squeeze more out of them. Collaborating with DLR will help make these missions a reality and allow green propulsion to be more universally applied in space.
We have discontinued the directory as a new service has been developed externally.
We have established a Data Science Review Board to provide MBIE with strategic and practical direction, guidance and leadership for matters relating to data science and algorithm governance.
We have made progress over recent years to move towards a digital and intelligence-led immigration system, but still face enduring challenges that we need to respond to.
We have more than 30 datasets available, ranging across a lot of topics.
We have now completed the 2018 Monitoring Report, which reports on progress to date. The monitoring report shows that:
We have published several guidance documents that you can see towards the end of this page. Guidance documents that may be relevant to HAV licence applicants include those on safety cases; orbital debris mitigation; liability, insurance, and indemnities; and technical capability.
We have published several guidance documents that you can see towards the end of this page. Guidance documents that may be relevant to facility licence applicants include those on safety cases; liability, insurance, and indemnities; and technical capability.
We have published several guidance documents that you can see towards the end of this page. Guidance documents that may be relevant to launch licence applicants include those on safety cases; orbital debris mitigation; liability, insurance, and indemnities; and technical capability.
We have published several guidance documents that you can see towards the end of this page. Guidance documents that may be relevant to payload permit applicants include those on orbital debris mitigation; payloads of a size less than 1U; liability, insurance, and indemnities; and active debris removal and on-orbit servicing missions.
We have released the following ultra-fast broadband policy documents in the interests of transparency and open governance.
We have responsibility for maintaining and reviewing charters for our regulatory systems.
We have responsibility for maintaining and reviewing charters. Review of each charter should occur at least every 5 years and include assessments of:
We have worked with a range of groups to develop the Bill.
We help government agencies with:
We help government to deliver better value by lifting procurement capability and performance. We:
We help keep people safe through consistent application of the law.
We help promote international regulatory cooperation to New Zealand regulatory agencies.
We help regions and businesses get the workers they need with a new temporary work visa process.
We help to Grow Aotearoa New Zealand for All to improve the well-being of New Zealanders. This page provides information about our business groups.
We help to identify and address the opportunities and challenges facing high growth startup businesses in New Zealand.
We help you know what you need to do, how to do it, and why.
We hold responsibilities relating to trade, including technical barriers to trade, import tariffs, trade remedies, competition, intellectual property and government procurement.
We initiated the survey to assess the Building Code compliance of structural repairs that were exempt from a building consent under Schedule 1 (repairs and maintenance) of the Building Act.
We invest in science through contestable funding rounds. This investment supports programmes which build high-performing science and innovation systems that will transform New Zealand into a more diverse, technologically advanced and smart nation.
We invest in science through contestable funding rounds. This investment supports programmes which build high-performing science and innovation systems.
We know a public consultation is a vital step to make sure we capture all possible options to mitigate the risks.
We lead New Zealand's participation in this taskforce at officials' level, but don't participate in its subsidiary workstreams. The taskforce undertakes cooperative action on regional energy security issues.
We lead the management of the Crown estate and help other agencies by providing advice and education on:
We listen to you, and we keep it simple.
We look forward to continuing the warm dialogue between our nations as it has been historically, and to identifying and expanding opportunities for cooperation in space -- in exploration, science, in STEM education, and more.
We looked at the processing as an example and there are 4 post farmgate consumer FCMG/CPG, health and home processing platforms emerged from screen 0.
We looked through each different themes and Antipodes was one of the many cosmetic firms bringing together the key elements of the emerging New Zealand cosmetics story. For each of these points here, the unique environment, the hero ingredients, innovation, circular and sustainable, and ethical. We then built those out into their own sections giving great examples of what the New Zealand firms have done.
We made significant changes to mining regulation in 2013.
We maintain the political neutrality required to enable us to work constructively with current and future governments:
We manage the following legislation:
We may also be required to disclose information under the Official Information Act 1982 or to a Parliamentary Select Committee or Parliament in response to a Parliamentary Question.
We may ask or require you to provide some personal information when you complete an online form (eg, the site feedback form or when subscribing to news or updates).
We may collect information by means in which an MBIE staff member is not immediately identifiable. This may be necessary where other means of information collection would prejudice an ongoing investigation, or otherwise prevent MBIE from fulfilling its responsibilities. This includes surveillance activities in accordance with the Search and Surveillance Act 2012.
We may engage external security consultants to gather information to support our regulatory compliance activities. Any engagement of these consultants will be approved by a General Manager, or Deputy Secretary where appropriate, and subject to robust contractual arrangements and regular oversight, with reporting to a governance group that is not directly involved in the decision-making or the result of the investigation.
We may follow/like organisations and individuals that are relevant to our organisation. This does not imply endorsement or guarantee the accuracy of their information.
We may request the assistance of another agency in relation to the exercising of our statutory powers, for example the New Zealand Police.
We may share information where necessary in order to properly carry out our legislated functions or to assist another public sector agency in fulfilling its regulatory compliance, law enforcement, or protective security responsibilities.
We may use cookies to gather data about trends in website usage using a tool called Google Analytics. This data will be viewable by website administrators and certain other staff. It may also be shared with other government agencies. This information is aggregated and it does not identify you personally.
We may use information about your use of our websites and other IT systems to prevent unauthorised access or attacks on these systems or to resolve such events. We may use this information even if you are not involved in such activity.
We may use information we gather to inform our wider compliance and regulatory strategies. In doing so we will comply with our obligations in the Privacy Act 2020 and any other relevant legislation.
We may use services from one or more third party suppliers to monitor or maintain the cyber security of our systems and information. These third party suppliers will have access to monitoring and logging information as well as information processed on our websites and other IT systems.
We may withhold information for specific reasons. If this occurs, we will explain the reasons why. For more information please refer to sections 6, 9 and 18 of the
We may, at our discretion, report, block or ban anyone who posts the above content, or who breaches these terms of use, or the terms of use of a social media channel.
We may, for example, share information with:
We model future energy supply and demand, and produce a range of useful energy and natural resources data and publications.
We monitor Crown Research Institutes (CRIs), Crown entity companies, statutory entities and Public Finance Act 1989 Schedule 4A non-listed companies. This page provides information on these entities and the current members of boards.
We monitor Crown Research Institutes, Crown entity companies, statutory entities and Schedule 4A non-listed companies.
We monitor the Financial Markets Authority and Te Ara Ahunga Ora Retirement Commission
We need buildings that are fit for purpose and comply with the relevant building standards and requirements. To achieve this, we develop fit-for-purpose regulation that ensures public safety and good quality homes and buildings.
We need to be consistent with the usage.
We need to build more meaningful partnerships.
We need to lift skills and productivity to ensure the long-term growth of the building and construction sector.
We now have a quick overview of the format that we had of each of the Stage III deep dives for sports nutrition, biocosmetics and marine bioactives.
We participate in the work of international bodies that support international regulatory cooperation. These include the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD).
We proactively release Cabinet papers and supporting advice on our policy work.
We produce Briefings to Incoming Ministers (BIMs) following a general election or change in minister. They provide an introduction to each portfolio and summarise key areas of policy and policy issues.
We propose a new single consolidated payment methodology 8. We recommend including a proposal in your May Cabinet paper to consolidate the greater of ODLP and ADP methodology Cabinet agreed in 2020 into a single calculation. W e will continue to work on the exact detail to ensure that the calculation is clear and functional and may include some refinements to the details below in your May Cabinet paper.
We propose that , when it is agreed that AL will accrue during weeks in a period of unpaid leave beyond the f irst week, the AWE divisor must be reduced by that number of weeks.
We provide advice and support to businesses to help them grow, be more innovative, raise their capability and do business more easily.
We provide advice and support to help New Zealand businesses get started, grow, innovate and raise their capability. We also work with other agencies to design and deliver services to businesses in better and smarter ways.
We provide advice to the Minister for Small Business and Manufacturing, and deliver services that support small businesses and manufacturers to grow and prosper.
We provide advice to the Minister of Tourism about the operations of the Institute.
We provide policy advice in the following areas of financial markets conduct regulation:
We provide policy advice on a range of issues relating to the financial markets conduct regulatory system.
We provide policy advice on a range of issues relating to the financial markets regulatory system.
We received 127 submissions on the draft Strategy during public consultation. These showed strong overall support for its direction and vision. People agreed with the Strategy being system-led and future-focused, placing workers at the centre.
We recognise that 18 months may not be enough time for all employers, with payroll providers and practitioners estimating the implementation process for a medium - large employer could take betwee n 9 - 28 months. We intend to test the proposed 18 - month implementation period during the exposure draft consultation process to better understand the practical implications of this timeframe
We recommend change s to the treatment of leave entitlements in a restructuring situation (amending the Employment R elations Act)
We record calls and retain emails for staff training purposes, helping us to improve the quality of our customer service and to ensure the information we provide is consistent and accurate. We may also share the communication internally with other MBIE business units if required.
We record the screen share sessions for quality assurance purposes. The screen recordings are stored on a secure server for 60days. If you wish to request information through the Official Information Act 1982, to make a complaint or to discuss your screen share session, please do so promptly to allow us sufficient time to process your request before the screen recording is deleted.
We regulate the use of space from New Zealand
We release a wide range of information to help and inform you.
We require all research fund applicants to declare in their funding proposals any technologies of special interest that may used as part of their research methodology. This covers a range of historic and emerging technologies including:
We reserve the right to report or remove (as appropriate) any posts or comments that do not comply with the:
We respect the authority of current and future governments:
We respect the backgrounds, differences and perspectives of all those with whom we work and serve:
We share our knowledge, experience and information to help others to be successful:
We sought public submissions to help inform the report, particularly on:
We sponsored a number of structural reports on the performance of commercial buildings in the Canterbury earthquakes. These include reports we commissioned to support the work of the Canterbury Earthquakes Royal Commission.
We strive to make a positive difference to the well-being of New Zealand and all New Zealanders:
We strongly recommend that you visit the NAATI website and take some time to explore the comprehensive NAATI Credentialing System and all it has to offer to those seeking to become credentialed as professional interpreters.
We support people to lift the level and quality of regulatory system governance in 2 ways:
We support rocket launches, high-altitude vehicle and payload permitting
We support the continuing success of New Zealand as a destination for screen activity, including film, television, digital effects and post-production work.
We survey recent migrants about their experiences of life in New Zealand and report on their settlement outcomes. We also survey New Zealanders about their perceptions of migrants and immigration to better understand community attitudes.
We surveyed independent providers of dispute resolution services (ie, those not employed by government) to obtain a more comprehensive understanding of the current dispute resolution service provider market.
We talked about the greater opportunity for reuse and repurposing of materials and products because we got so much information about them. That obviously allows us to refurbish and remanufacture as well potentially. Good repair and maintenance, product leasing, we could lease something because we've got all the data around. If we are leasing a flooring or releasing any other aspect of the building and some new model where we lease it and change it after a few years, then we've got all the information the digital twin that can manage that. And it facilitates the recycling of materials and use of recycled material.
We then have a little example here which is when we are at the end of the construction phase. And this is another opportunity where we can use the digital twin to look at timelines, we can try and manage the build in a much better way. This little video is just a representation of how we can transform from the digital plan into the actual construction and see how we're matching in terms of performance and timeline. But again, as you know with construction, things don't always go to plan. Maybe we want to change some materials; say we've spotted a really new recycled flooring that we want to use and it ticks a lot of boxes for the stakeholders and so we can swap things in like that and then see what's the difference to the building. How does it affect air quality, how it affects emissions, what's the lifetime of that?
We think both of these consultation options will deliver the desired feedback and increase the quality and workability of the Bill for introduction. A targeted approach has the advantage of keeping submissions to a more reasonable number, which will help ensure we are better
We treat information with care, and use and disclose it only for its intended purpose:
We understand your personal information is important to you, and we are committed to protecting your privacy. We will only retain personal information until no longer necessary and according to our legal requirements.
We undertake a programme of assessment of most of our regulatory systems based on regulation best practice principles and past regulatory failures.
We undertake personal and professional development to improve the performance of ourselves and MBIE:
We use ORCID iDs as unique identifiers for research funding to accurately link research publications, data and other research activities to researchers.
We use a range of funding and support programmes to invest the majority of our science and innovation funds. Each programme is supported with comprehensive documentation covering application and assessment details.
We use social media to share the latest information on our programmes and services, and to enable 2-way conversations and feedback.
We used different criteria in home processing than we did in primary production.
We used qualitative interviews with landlords to inform the survey design. This research also provided insight into how they are choosing to act as a result of the new requirements.
We want New Zealand to have safe, healthy, durable homes and buildings. This page provides information about our investigations and reviews for safer buildings.
We want a scheme that honours the Treaty partnership
We want everyone to take advantage of the opportunities that New Zealand's participation in the global space economy has to offer.
We want thriving space and advanced aviation sectors in New Zealand to help rebuild our economy. These sectors are already innovative and inspiring, employing a productive and highly skilled workforce to develop capabilities that improve our lives. We have an opportunity to take this even further.
We want to hear from everybody in both of those sectors
We want to hear from individuals, businesses, service providers, and any other interested parties on these proposed changes.
We want to make it easier for culturally and linguistically diverse people to participate in New Zealand society. One way we can do that is to ensure that government agencies can access interpreting services of an appropriate standard, when required.
We welcome any questions, suggestions or comments about international regulatory cooperation.
We welcome feedback and ideas from our followers and will try to join these conversations where possible, however we can't guarantee we will be able to reply individually to every post. If you have an urgent query, please contact us directly.
We welcome input and suggestions on screen sector policy from industry and the wider public, particularly in relation to economic development of the sector and international productions.
We will acknowledge your request as soon as practical and respond no later than 20 working days after we receive it. Sometimes for large requests or those requiring consultation, the Act allows for a time limit extension. If so, we will let you know and give you a specific due date.
We will add to this section as we work on improving information and data, particularly with the development of the New Zealand Research Information System (NZRIS).
We will apply the charter where the use of algorithms can significantly impact the wellbeing of people, or there is a high likelihood many people will suffer an unintended adverse impact. We will assess our algorithms for risk and apply the charter accordingly.
We will be gaining new insights into free-space optical communications, laser communication instrumentation, satellite tracking, and ground station operations.
We will continue monitoring progress in 2019.
We will do our best to help you promptly.
We will ensure the education, immigration and welfare systems work together to meet the current and future skills needs of workers and businesses.
We will generally not share personal information that is provided or collected through our social media channels, unless it is necessary to do so for the purpose for which you gave us the information (eg, to investigate a complaint) or where you consent. We will not otherwise disclose personal information provided or collected through our social media channels unless required or otherwise permitted by law.
We will generally not share personal information that is provided or collected through this website, unless it is necessary to do so for the purpose for which you gave us the information (eg, to investigate a complaint) or where you consent. We will not otherwise disclose personal information provided or collected through this website unless required or otherwise permitted by law.
We will generally only use personal information provided to us through our social media channels for the purpose you provided it (eg, to improve our services, or to action or respond to the information provided). We may also use personal information provided to us for other reasons permitted under the Privacy Act 2020 (eg, with your consent, for a directly related purpose, or where the law permits or requires it).
We will generally only use personal information provided to us through this website or the MBIE Customer Service Centre for the purpose you provided it (eg, to administer, evaluate and improve the site, to improve our services, or to action or respond to the information provided). We may also use personal information provided to us through this website or the MBIE Customer Service Centre for other reasons permitted under the Privacy Act (eg, with your consent, for a directly related purpose, or where the law permits or requires it).
We will need to manage resources carefully when deciding what changes can be made to the Bill prior to introduction
We will only retain personal information as long as it is required for the purposes for which the information may lawfully be used.
We will provide further updates as more information becomes available. You can sign up for Horizon Europe updates here. If you have any questions or want to get in touch with the New Zealand leads you can email
We will publish a summary of submissions document and may publish individual submissions on the MBIE website. When you make a submission, MBIE will consider that you have consented to it being published on the MBIE website, unless you clearly state otherwise (you can easily notify us of this in the submission form provided). If your submission contains any information that is confidential or that you do not want published, you can also say this in your submission.
We will seek to consult with you when responding to any such requests for information under the OIA. If you object to the release of information in your submission, we will take that into account when responding to such a request.
We will support workplaces to provide all workers with quality work with opportunities to maximise their potential. We will protect workers from exploitative work and enforce minimum standards.
We will take all practicable steps to verify information received from third parties.
We work closely with a number of agencies to promote science and innovation in New Zealand.
We work closely with a number of agencies to promote science and innovation in New Zealand. There are also other organisations, such as industry bodies and private companies, that are funding or carrying out research in New Zealand.
We work closely with a number of agencies to promote science and innovation in New Zealand. Together, we seek strong links between the science and innovation sector and overseas research interests, as well as with New Zealand businesses and the wider public.
We work in partnership with the Ministry of Primary Industries and New Zealand Trade and Enterprise to manage the Food and Beverage Project and produce various reports about the sector.
We work to ensure that telecommunications markets operate efficiently, and the commerce and ICT infrastructure is well developed.
We work to make our services accessible, efficient and effective for all:
We work to the best of our ability at all times:
We work with a range of stakeholders including businesses, unions and across government.
We work with ministers across a range of portfolios.
We'll be publishing the data generated with our new methodology for national average prices from Wednesday 7 May. The data series using the existing methodology will continue to be published in parallel alongside this for 4 weeks from this date. Supporting information will be published on this page.
We've come to this example here. It's like oh, it's actually time to replace some of the insulation and we've got a better biobased product to put in there that performs better. So we can put in the change. And then we can see what impact that will have. And, you know, it gives us an opportunity to look at different materials and swapping in different equipment as we as we go. And then we can adjust things. But obviously, we know so much about that building, we've captured a lot of the data, we know what the materials are, we've got predictive maintenance. So that's really helpful from a cost management point of view and just managing the building.
We've got one in Christchurch, which is a flood digital twin, which is looking at managing flooding. And again, we're looking at some partnerships and collaboration there to do that.
Weather Forecasting System Preliminary Regulatory Impact Statement
Weather Forecasting System Review Recommendations
Weather Permitting: review of open access to weather data in New Zealand
Web versions of the documents for the consultation 'Review of New Zealand Companies Office Fees and Levies (2025)'.
Webinar about space career pathways
Weekly average importer margins
Weekly average price components for regular petrol
Weekly data and statistics about managed isolation and quarantine in New Zealand.
Weekly fuel price monitoring
Weekly oil price monitoring data dictionary [PDF 637KB]
Weekly report to ministers
Welcoming Communities Pilot Programme Evaluation
Welcoming communities New Zealand programme - Key messages Updated [PDF 287KB]
Welcoming communities pilot programme - Final evaluation summary report July 2017-June 2019 (Martin Jenkins) [PDF 256KB]
Well-designed regulatory settings provide a predictable environment that promotes competition and one where businesses are confident to employ more staff, invest, innovate and enter new markets. This drives growth that benefits all New Zealanders.
Well-functioning housing and construction markets support growth in productivity and employment, and affect macroeconomic stability, health, security, and social cohesion.
Well-planned infrastructure supports the efficient and sustainable movement of people, goods, and information. It facilitates trade and investment while improving living standards and is key to enabling and driving economic growth.
Wellington 6140, New Zealand
Wellington Regional Workforce Plan 2022
Wellington local insights report: November 2023
Western Bay of Plenty District Council
Whakaari White Island - WorkSafe report [PDF 1.3MB]
Whakaari/White Island - reviewing policy settings [PDF 1.5MB]
Whakaari/White Island eruption: cross government response [PDF 925KB]
Whakapapa of the Action Plan
Whangarei Local Fibre Company Limited Fibre Deed
What are Long-term Insights Briefings?
What are Regulatory Systems Amendment Bills?
What are online financial scams?
What are the likely risks and unintended impacts ? How significant are they and how will they be minimised or mitigated? Although changes to the Act would provide greater prescription and can be systematised , obligations would remain complex in relation to employees with diverse working arrangements and v ariable pay structures. This complexity means that the risk of incorrect payments for some employees is not entirely removed. However, greater regulation and support for compliance from MBIE would reduce this risk. It is also anticipated that small to med ium sized enterprises (SMEs) may be more affected than larger businesses by the proposed changes . This is due to SMEs being less likely to have dedicated payroll professionals as part of their staff and less able to absorb increased costs. These impacts co uld be mitigated by assisting smaller businesses when implementing changes to the Act. Section C : Evidence certainty and quality assurance Agency rating of evidence certainty? An external professional services company with payroll expertise was contracted to provide independent advice on the implications that the options for change would have if they were implemented across New Zealand. A key part of this testing was to ensure t hat options were tested against the wide range of working arrangements and employer types that can be found across the New Zealand economy. Using anonymised payroll data from a number of different payroll systems and employers , this testing investigated wh ether the options were implementable in payroll systems, how options compare d to the current Act provisions, and identif ied any issues with the proposals. The model used in the testing was built with the same underlying functionalities for calculating enti tlements and pa yments as payroll systems in order to generate the same results. MBIE has confidence in the testing undertaken with regards to implementability, impacts and estimated increased payments for variable workers . However, as the testing was focus ed on non -standard working arrangements, it did not include a representative sample of all working arrangements and c annot be extrapolated directly to the wider labour force. 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:06:16
What are they? Bioactive food components are physiologically active constituents in food or dietary supplements derived from both animal or plant sources. Essentially, they have to be added to something else which causes an in effect.
What changes we have made to the methodology used for monitoring importer margins
What child labour exploitation looks like in practice
What cost pressures does WorkSafe face over the next four years and do they align with its role, strategy and government priorities?
What do we do with it? Do we share it?
What do you think about our requirements for workers to be eligible for payments? For example, having paid levies, being a New Zealand citizen or resident, and different coverage for health and disability-related job losses.
What does the New Zealand Space Scholarship cover?
What does the Strategy mean for you?
What does the circular economy mean for my business?
What does the future of business for Aotearoa New Zealand look like?
What employers can do to prepare for the changes
What happens after you have made your submission
What information is covered by this statement, and why do we collect it?
What is Buy Now Pay Later?
What is a 'just transition'?
What is a regulatory system?
What is an Industry Transformation Plan?
What is dispute resolution?
What is regulatory system governance?
What is the discounted price?
What mobile coverage is currently available
What outcomes do you hope to achieve through this collaboration?
What people had to say about the Strategy?
What science and innovation funding and investment opportunities are open and what is scheduled to open in the coming months.
What some leading researchers have to say about the use of ORCID iDs in research funding
What success will look like (outcomes)
What the programme will deliver
What to study after school
What unique benefits do you see as a result of working with DLR researchers and scientists as opposed to those from other countries?
What we are proposing and seeking feedback on
What we then found is that we have two different systems and two different ways we had to look at it. One was the biomass production system, so that is the agriculture, silver culture, the aquaculture, what we are producing eg farming and then be biomass systems ie what are we milling or killing or cutting up etc. We looked at it separately and then feed into this into this funnel.
What we want to achieve (objectives)
When US company LeoLabs was looking for an engineering firm to help design a structure to house its Kiwi Space Radar (KSR) it chose Ruamoko Solutions, an innovative New Zealand company recognised for pioneering seismic design for the Christchurch rebuild.
When a partial strike occurs, employers will be able to either:
When considering whether or not to charge, we use these
When language assistance services are not provided, or when these are inconsistent, or of a questionable quality, it can result in less effective public services, prolonged service involvement with increased costs for certain client groups, delays in the successful integration of former refugees and migrants, and compromised confidence in public services altogether.
When making a prosecution decision, decision makers must follow
When making decisions about information gathering, we take into account a range of considerations, including the impact on individuals and their privacy; the harm that MBIE is responsible for preventing or addressing; the public interest in MBIE fulfilling its regulatory, law enforcement and security responsibilities and to assist other public sector agencies to fulfil their responsibilities; and the obligations on MBIE as a public sector agency.
When posting online (for example on Facebook or Twitter) you will not say anything that will bring MBIE into disrepute or compromise your ability to do your job.
When the Fund closed in 2017 all remaining funds were rolled into the Tourism Infrastructure Fund.
When the complaint relates to an allegation of discrimination, the complainant may consider contacting the Human Rights Commission.
When the fund closed in 2017 all remaining funds were rolled into to the Tourism Infrastructure Fund.
When visiting other websites, please refer to the terms and conditions of use, privacy and copyright policies of those sites.
When we set you up as a supplier in our system, we will ask you to select which of the options below best describes your organisation so that we can have a better understanding of the role your business plays in the New Zealand economy.
When we then when we looked through the 100 process we divided then and looked at them in separate ways. We looked at what was in the production system, we looked at a land-based system and then in a water-based system, and then in the processing system we looked at these in a slightly different way, as how do they better support the outcomes from existing uses of biomasses which is the wood, the wool, health and home etc. We looked at how to support better farm inputs, so the feed, fertilizers, pesticides etc. Then number three was how do we begin to transition away from the fossil fuels, looking at alternatives such as replacements for coal, petrol, natural gas, plastics etc.
When we work with others and share information
When we're looking through this, we're actually thinking about now, all the way to 2075 - 2100, as long as we can really. And we're thinking about how over time these things will shape. So, we'll be starting the use case at the beginning, which is now. And with the technology we have here and now, and the current systems and economy we have, but obviously we'll be going ahead right up until maybe the end of the century and what could that mean, how can we envisage how things could develop?
When you can get rural broadband under RBI
When you can seek new certification
When you imagine your future what do you see yourself doing?
When you make a booking request, providers can accept or reject it. There are standard service levels for response times and fulfilment rates. If a provider rejects a booking, you can go to another provider on the panel.
When you provide personal information, unless otherwise indicated, it will be held by us. It may be stored or accessed on behalf of us by authorised third parties (such as third-party contractors) to the extent that is necessary, for example for them to administrate or work on the site. We will store and keep your personal information secure in accordance with the Privacy Act 2020 and any agents will be subject to our information security and privacy requirements.
When you provide personal information, unless otherwise indicated, it will be held by us. It may be stored or accessed on behalf of us by authorised third parties (such as third-party contractors) to the extent that is necessary. We will store and keep your personal information secure in accordance with the Privacy Act 2020 and any agents will be subject to our information security and privacy requirements.
When you subscribe to one of our alerts or newsletters, the details you provide may be stored in a secure third-party database (eg,
Where any information provided (which may include personal information) to, or through, this site or the MBIE Customer Service Centre constitutes public records, it will be retained to the extent required by the Public Records Act 2005.
Where articles are not yet published or submitted at the time of final reporting, the list of publications should include articles in submission or in preparation with a statement of how these will be made available once published.
Where do the costs fall? Most costs are anticipated to fall to employers . These costs include increased annual holidays and leave payments for some employees due to changes to the ‘gross earnings’ definition , parental leave provisions, and a new payment methodology . Employees that have variable working arrangements and complex remuneration structures are most likely to receive an increase in annual holidays and leave payments as a result of the proposed changes to the A ct. It is estimated that between 60,600 and 580,4001 employees, or 3 to 27 per cent of all New Zealand employees, fall within these categories and are most likely to work in the ‘health care and social assistance’, ‘accommodation and food services’ and ‘public administration and safety’ sectors. The majority of employees, particularly those with standard hours and stable earnings, should not see increased payments when compared to the current Act. However, improved clarity and certainty should help address non-compliance issues and many employees may see changes in their holiday and leave pay as a result.
Where information has not been published about a payload, there are grounds for withholding that information under the Official Information Act 1982.
Where is Mobile Black Spot Coverage?
Where possible resolving disputes regarding declined proposals and informing the employee of the appeals process for declined flexible work proposals.
Where possible, programmes and services should be framed as family-centered, contributing to building intergenerational economic well-being and inclusive of cultural practices (e.g. cultural gifting and tithing). The relationship between financial aspirations and cultural values within Pacific communities is important, and these values shape how people think about and handle money, including how wealth is saved or shared within the community.
Where to get help and more information
Where to get your vehicle certified self-contained
Where to go for more information
Where to go to resolve your dispute
Where we identify the need to use the information further, for example, to consider or investigate compliance breaches, or concerns, or initiate our own investigations or inquiries, we will only do so if required or permitted by law.
Where you can freedom camp
Whether the applicant or a person who is to have or is likely to have contr ol over the exercise of the rights under the licence: • has been subject to an order under the Mental Health (Compulsory Assessment and Treatment Act) 1992 , and if so, when. Foreign licences, permits or authorisations For any foreign licences, permits or authorisations applied for, granted or declined : • Details of the foreign regulator (name, location) • Authorisation or registration numbers/identifiers and copies of the relevant authorisation • Date of issue and length of time in which the authorisation is in ef fect • Entity/entities in respect of which authorisation has been issued • Information regarding any conditions imposed and the nature of those conditions .
Whether the applicant or a person who is to have or is likely to have control over the exercise of the rights under the licence: • has been subject to an order under the Men tal Health (Compulsory Assessment and Treatment ) Act 1992 . If so, state when . Information for launch facility licences Facility details • A summary of the facility, including location and an overview of its proposed launch operations (including a general description of launch vehicles to be launched from the facility, frequencies of operation, and proposed launch trajectories ) • A site plan showing launch site and command and control centre • An overview of any protective security (including cyber- security) mea sures or policies in place to protect launch facility systems.
Whether the applicant or a person who is to have or is likely to have control over the exercise of the rights under the licence: • has been subject to an order under the Mental Health (Compulsory Assessment and Treatment ) 21
Whether you choose a light touch or detailed approach, be clear about why you are developing a plan, who needs to be involved with clearly defined roles and responsibilities and how the plan will be implemented (and funded).
Which analytical tools are suited to transformative change?
Which analytical tools are suited to transformative change? [PDF 906KB]
Which language do you use? - Brochure [PDF, 664KB]
Which language do you use? - Poster [PDF, 693KB]
While MBIE and DIA are co-leading the implementation of the programme, outcomes depend on input from many agencies. The programme shares the governance structure of the New Zealand Refugee Resettlement and Migrant Settlement and Integration Strategies.
While agriculture, forestry, and fishing were the primary contributors to GDP in 2018, professional, scientific and technical services led the way in 2023.
While financial support will be for a maximum of six months, this could be extended for up to 12 months for people undertaking appropriate training or vocational rehabilitation programmes. This is common in international schemes, and ensures those in the scheme have financial security if they are training or rehabilitating.
While launch capabilities are increasingly in the private sector, governments continue to make up a large proportion of the customer base for launch providers, whether directly or indirectly. These payloads can range from research and development, to operational civil services, to military and intelligence payloads. All payloads, including those owned by foreign governments, must meet the tests outlined above required under OSHAA.
While the 2 groups operate separately, sharing a chair will allow for connections to be made between the two systems where appropriate.
While the consultation has now closed, you can find out more about the issues and options we consulted on here:
While there are benefits from BNPL to consumers, businesses and the wider economy as an alternative to other forms of credit, the Government has acted on concerns that for some people, the use of BNPL will be unaffordable and unsuitable, and could result in financial hardship.
While we prepare for these bold and ambitious missions, it is important that the United States and our partners commit to conducting ourselves pacefully responsibly and transparently for the benefit of all, to ensure a safe and sustainable environment for outer space activities.
Who can be a sex worker in New Zealand
Who to contact about exploitation
Who we are and what we do
Why MBIE focuses on regulatory system governance
Why dispute resolution is important
Why international regulatory cooperation is important
Why this objective is important
Why this research was commissioned
Why we monitor importer margins
Why we need organisation size and type of ownership information
Why we need this Action Plan
Wielding the waste of the nation to combat COVID-19
William Rolleston, Chair, Genomics Aotearoa, South Pacific Sera Limited
With 250+ languages spanning established as well as rare and emerging languages and dialects and a focus on punctuality, accuracy, and confidentiality, 2M's services are tailored for various industries, including healthcare, legal, and business, ensuring clients receive outstanding support whenever and wherever they need it at the click of a button.
With a targeted approach, t here is a risk of missing some stakeholders who would have liked to make a submission . However,
With adversity comes opportunity, and we now have the chance to reshape our industry and live up to our huge potential and global competitive advantage as Brand New Zealand.
With eInvoicing, businesses no longer need to generate paper-based or PDF invoices that have to be printed, posted or emailed; and buyers no longer need to manually enter these into their financial system.
With high-level modelling of this nature the results are assessed against the status quo, rather than against a range of feasible land use and production alternatives. This limits the opportunity to assess alternative pathways, which may have lower environmental costs or offer higher economic returns. (Such as the utilisation of new forest production for engineered timber in construction rather than biomass for energy.)
With support from the Ministry for the Environment and the NESTF Technical Advisory Group, we have developed a users' guide to help councils and the telecommunications industry understand and implement the NESTF.
With the changes in regulation, gene technologies could:
With the new migrant exploitation research released, the findings should be used to inform how the government can best deliver information to migrant workers and their employers.
With these caveats in mind, data from Jobs Online tracks well in terms of the direction of change of other labour market indicators, such as the unemployment rate.
With unique expertise, talent and technology, coupled with our size and location, New Zealand offers surprising advantages when it comes to making things happen.
With updated rules, our scientists can make advances in healthcare, climate change, protect the environment, lift our agricultural productivity and boost exports.
Within the environmental services sector, observations make up the most basic data from which value-add services, such as weather forecasts or climatological products, are derived.
Work closely with our international partners to promote cooperation and reduce barriers to trade including restrictive export controls and domestic sourcing requirements.
Work is underway to explore the changes necessary to ensure a more integrated weather forecasting system including the implementation pathway.
Work is underway to implement the Tourism Communities: Support, Recovery and Re-set Plan. Further information on each of the components is set out below, and will be updated as delivery decisions are finalised.
Work on modern slavery supply chain legislation in New Zealand is on hold while the Government focuses on its current Workplace Relations and Safety priorities. Decisions on whether to progress modern slavery supply chain legislation will be made in due course.
Work on the Adventure Activities Regulations has been completed and these will come into force on 1 April 2024.
Work programme progress update as at 14 June 2022 [PDF 147KB]
Work programme progress update as of 13 September 2022 [PDF 774KB]
Work programme status update [PDF 146KB]
Work programme status update [PDF 228KB]
Work supported by statutes administered by MBIE
Work with engineered stone and materials containing crystalline silica
Work-related health and safety
WorkSafe NZ: reviewing how it administers the adventure activities regime and making process improvements as required
WorkSafe New Zealand Act 2013
WorkSafe New Zealand Strategic Baseline Review [PDF 5.6MB]
WorkSafe should implement processes to ensure that when they are informed about an audit being planned for activities on Whakaari White Island, auditors are told to use an appropriate technical expert and are provided the details of the technical experts available.
WorkSafe should recognise activities carried out on Whakaari White Island as its own adventure activity (rather than as part of trekking/mountaineering activities)
WorkSafe will add a section to the Safety Audit Standard on assessing and managing the risks associated with natural hazards. They will also review the Standard more broadly.
WorkSafe will also publish guidance material on good practice management of natural hazard risks.
WorkSafe will over the next 2 years review and add to the package of activity safety guidelines.
WorkSafe, in partnership with the identified technical experts, should consider whether it should develop safety guidelines for activities on Whakaari White Island.
WorkSafe, or an appropriate industry body, should identify individuals or organisations with appropriate experience and qualifications, and ensure they are available to be engaged as a technical expert when required.
Worker eligibility [PDF 42KB]
Worker engagement, participation and representation
Workers (employees, volunteers)
Workers eligible after six months of levy contributions in the previous 18 months
Workers made redundant or laid off for economic reasons will receive up to six months of financial support from the scheme
Workers with health conditions or disabilities will receive the same amount of insurance cover
Workforce Survey of Organisations Report
Working Matters Disability Employment Action Plan - released in August 2020
Working Matters Disability Employment Action Plan monitoring dashboards
Working Matters ensures disabled people and people with health conditions have an equal opportunity to access employment. You can find the alternative versions of the action plan for various accessibility needs and read more about at the link below.
Working Matters: Report back on the Disability Employment Action Plan
Working Safer: A blueprint for health and safety at work
Working arrangements that do not meet the exclusion criteria will continue to be assessed using the current full test in section 6 of the Employment Relations Act 2000.
Working conditions of migrant employees (2021 and 2022)
Working in partnership with others
Working in the space sector
Working together to support and facilitate R&D in New Zealand.
Working with children or vulnerable adults
Working with communities to transition New Zealand to a low-emissions economy.
Working with the private sector to put together the most relevant digital tools, technologies, products and services to support small businesses with becoming digital.
Workplace Relations and Safety
Workplace Relations and Safety Policy.
Workplace Relations and Safety portfolio funding and savings summary [PDF 577KB]
Workplace relations in New Zealand's screen industry
Workplace relations in the screen industry
Workplace relationships in the screen industry
Workplace, Safety and Security
Works for agencies and teams
Workshop: Potential of digital twin technology
Written along the full length of the arrow are the following
Written submissions closed at 12pm
Xerra Earth Observation Institute
You are responsible for ensuring that all parties mentioned in your proposal:
You are solely responsible for the security of the confidential information within your desktop, and MBIE accepts no responsibility for any expenses or losses incurred or any action taken because of receipt of any confidential information.
You are welcome to create a hyperlink from another website to this one. However, the link must not be presented on your website in any context that implies that a Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) website has an association with your site, or that we endorse your site or product.
You can access all of our research and evaluation reports in our document library.
You can access the Radiocommunications Act 1989 and Radiocommunications Regulations 2001 on the NZ Legislation website:
You can also download the PDF version below.
You can also explore MTAGDP data graphically in our Regional Economic Activity Tools:
You can also provide anonymous information to
You can also reach out to our National Contact Points
You can also read the full discussion document, and provide your feedback through a short survey or full submission in our Have your say section.
You can also register with The Treasury, but they do not offer a nominations service.
You can also report migrant exploitation via Crimestoppers, which provides an anonymous and simple way to pass on information to authorities. There are two ways you can contact Crimestoppers via 0800 555 111 or through an email form available on their website
You can be a member of a political party however you will not reveal advice given to the Government and you will abide by your duty of confidentiality to MBIE.
You can contact the New Zealand Space Agency at
You can email your request to:
You can fill out and email our submission form, or complete an online survey. Submissions close at 5pm on 18 November 2022.
You can find more details on the action plan here:
You can find out about Te Kawa Mataaho Public Service Commission guidance and requirements here:
You can find out more about the MEDAB and its members here:
You can find research papers under this theme below.
You can find the consultation document to read on our website, along with a submission template for you to complete if you would like to share your views with us.
You can find the inaugural strategy here:
You can learn more about signing up for GETS access via the New Zealand Government Procurement website.
You can make a request for Official Information via our online form or you can make a request by post.
You can manually disable cookies at any time. Check your browser's 'Help' to find out how (disabling cookies will not affect your ability to use this website).
You can post your request to:
You can read background information about the Cabinet decision in these documents:
You can read key findings from the four reports:
You can read more about how connectivity is improving in your region in the quarterly updates below.
You can read more about these changes at:
You can read more about this at:
You can read more on He Ara Waiora below:
You can read previous work at:
You can read the Acceptable Solutions and more about restricting access to residential pools on the
You can read the Proactively released Cabinet Paper and associated Minute here:
You can read the full letter below:
You can register with any of the following nominating agencies:
You can search by keyword, date, document type and topic.
You can search for all our research and evaluation reports in the
You can see when you may expect a response by using the
You can send us your ideas on how to drive New Zealand's economic growth through the form below.
You can send your submission to us by email or post.
You can share the form with others
You can use www.mbie.govt.nz without disclosing any personal information.
You can view a copy of the now repealed Fair Pay Agreements Act 2022 at:
You don't have to register as a postal operator if you carry letters:
You have a right of access to and correction of any information you provided during the screen share session. If you wish to access or correct any information held by MBIE in relation to your screen share session, please refer to the "Make a request for official information" page of our website.
You have options about how to proceed with this work 31. We welcome the opportunity to discuss the Holidays Act Review with you in more detail, so that we can understand how you would like to progress this work. The section below sets out some areas for initial consideration and discussion. The priority to be given to progressing work on reforming the Holidays Act 32. It would be useful to discuss the priority of this work with you , relative to other aspects of your policy work programme. The Coalition Government’s agreements state that a priority for this term is impr oving the quality of regulation . Given the impact of the longstanding issues with the Act (discussed in paragraphs 11 -17 above) on all employers and employees , we recommend that progressing legislative changes to improve the Holidays Act be given
You have rights when you shop for goods and services. Find out more about your consumer rights.
You may also be interested in:
You may be a victim of migrant exploitation if:
You may choose to voluntarily provide personal information through our social media channels. This information may be viewable by account administrators, and our staff (as appropriate).
You may choose to voluntarily provide personal information through this website (eg, in the feedback form or when subscribing to news and updates). This information may be viewable by site administrators, our staff (as appropriate) and third-party contractors who may administrate or work on the site.
You may communicate privately with a Minister or MP about matters outside of your role at MBIE, but if you are in a senior position or work closely with Ministers, you should exercise particular care in doing so.
You might be interested in:
You might like to explore these searches
You must get permission from the copyright owner to use:
You must have a transport service licence issued by the New Zealand Transport Agency if you operate a goods service vehicle.
You must log in with your CMS password in order to view the draft or archived content.
You must perform your duties honestly and impartially and avoid any personal, financial or professional situations which may compromise (or be seen to compromise) your integrity. For example, giving preferential treatment to an organisation in which you have an interest.
You should not necessarily expect to be reappointed. In some cases, legislation sets out the maximum amount of time a board member can serve. The Minister has to decide that there are sound reasons for your reappointment.
You should only proceed if you've been instructed to do so by a MBIE Client Services Advisor.
You will act in good faith.
You will advise MBIE if you are made bankrupt or enter into a No Asset Procedure.
You will be active in your own self-development and take opportunities to enhance your performance.
You will be politically neutral in all of your dealings in the workplace, irrespective of what your personal views may be.
You will carry out all lawful and reasonable instructions.
You will carry out your duties efficiently and use your skills and resources to the best of your ability and be present at and available for work as required.
You will contribute to a healthy and safe workplace.
You will declare any secondary employment or contracting/consulting or business ventures that you are involved with.
You will disclose all conflicts of interest (including potential and perceived conflicts) to your manager. For example, a family involvement in a company tendering for business with MBIE, ownership of a rental property during a dispute with tenants, when a family member appears on your recruitment panel, acting on behalf of others in tribunals or processing the application of a person known or related to you (for example processing an immigration application for a family friend). This can also include conflicts of interest arising from being a member of a club, society
You will disclose all gifts you accept over the value of $50 that are offered in the course of your employment, such as prizes, tickets to sporting events, fees, discounts, upgrades, free travel, products, services, entertainment and hospitality or any other form of benefit, favour, reward or inducement.
You will disclose if you hold another public office.
You will disclose new convictions and/or pending criminal charges.
You will disclose past criminal convictions not covered by the Criminal Records (Clean Slate) Act 2004 or any other convictions that you are legally required to disclose.
You will ensure any communications you make, whether internally or externally, are professional and respectful.
You will ensure that you remain up to date with any continuous professional development that may be required for you to perform your role.
You will ensure that your contribution to any public debate or discussion on policy matters maintains the discretion and neutrality appropriate to your position.
You will ensure that your personal views do not impact on your work at MBIE. This includes ensuring that any personal adherence to or work for a particular political or moral cause or movement does not impact your work performance, discredit MBIE or jeopardise its relationship with clients and/or the Minister.
You will familiarise yourself with and adhere to all relevant MBIE policies, procedures and practices.
You will find the report at the link below.
You will follow all lawful and reasonable instructions.
You will get a unique link to the form and a password, which you can share with others. Only 1 person can access the form at a time.
You will maintain confidentiality in relation to work matters at all times, including after your employment has ended.
You will maintain open communication and share information.
You will maintain standards of behaviour, language and dress that are appropriate to the workplace and that uphold a positive image of MBIE.
You will make it clear to others when you are commenting as a private individual.
You will not access or use MBIE information and systems for your personal gain, curiosity, or interest or for the unauthorised gain, curiosity, or interest of another person.
You will not access or work on matters for your family, friends or acquaintances, nor provide them with unauthorised advice or assistance.
You will not approach a Minister or MP about an employment relationship problem. The process for addressing such issues is outlined in your employment agreement.
You will not be present at work in an unfit state, for example being under the influence of alcohol, drugs or other intoxicants.
You will not bring MBIE into disrepute. For example by making statements to the media without authorisation, or making public criticism of or comments on (including on social media) MBIE and/or policies with which you have been professionally involved or associated.
You will not make a personal attack on any person.
You will not participate in a political event that advertises your official capacity within MBIE.
You will not pass on or sell MBIE information or information held by MBIE to a third party, for example to a family member or a collection agency, or share information about a tender process with a company participating in that process.
You will not publicaly criticise or comment in a personal capacity on policies with which you have been professionally involved or associated.
You will not store or use MBIE information on unapproved ICT systems or services such as personal email accounts and cloud web services.
You will not unlawfully discriminate against any person.
You will not use your position as an employee of MBIE to obtain information not normally required by you in the course of your employment.
You will obey the law of the country in which you are working.
You will perform your role in line with the performance and behaviour expectations set by your manager
You will provide full, frank and impartial advice to the Government if required in the course of your duties.
You will refrain from physical, verbal, written or psychological violence or bullying of any kind, racial or sexual harassment and unlawful discrimination.
You will treat our customers and other people you have dealings with in your role with courtesy and respect.
You will undertake the duties of your position diligently and to a satisfactory standard to help MBIE meet its purpose.
You will value and support the contribution of all colleagues.
You will work collaboratively with your colleagues and external stakeholders.
You will work constructively and positively with your colleagues.
YouTube Community Guidelines
Your GST number (if applicable)
Your board member fees will be paid in accordance with either:
Your business name or trade name
Your contact at MBIE may give you a form to provide us with the following information:
Your password is randomly generated, and we do not have access to it.
Your responsibility as an employer
Youth Employment Action Plan - released in August 2019
Youth Employment Action Plan Monitoring and reporting Dashboard: August 2021 [PDF 376KB]
Youth Employment Action Plan monitoring and reporting dashboard
Youth Employment Action Plan monitoring and reporting dashboard: June 2022 [PDF 495KB]
Zahra Champion, CE, BioTechNZ
Zero emission hop-on hop-off buses will be the main transport on the road, with a park and ride system
Zoo and Aquarium Association
[ CAB - 2 0 - MIN - 0100 ] .
[2323 - 0982 refers] . As you are aware, t he Employment (Leave Entitlements) Bill 1
[A video of a person presenting at a podium in the upper right corner of the screen.]
[From the bottom center screen, a graphic of a blue hand reaches up, pointed finger extended, and clicks on the Wellington city symbol. The next slide is labelled "Design phase" and shows a 3D isometric cityscape appears with the central building highlighted in blue. The city building change in size and shape as Callum talks.]
[Include a definition of an aircraft in the regulations by reference to the Civil Aviation Act ]
[Isometric building image zooms out to an isometric city with various building highlighted in blue. Blue circles with city symbols appear over each district.]
[Next slide is labelled "End of Life Phase". Drawings of brick, wood and a computer chip are superimposed over the isometric building and all feed into a recycling symbol. There's a symbol of a crane and wrecking ball in the upper right corner, next to the video of the speaker.]
[Next slide is labelled "Examples"]
[Next slide is labelled "Procurement phase" and shows a desktop dashboard. The dashboard is divided into sections showing the isographic building from the previous slide, building material options such as modular steel, a comparision between materials and a simulation of the structural impact. The user profile reads "Hi Mary Jane, have a great day."]
[Next slide shows the dashboard on a mobile app instead of a desktop computer. The isometric building is now circled in green.]
[Slide is titled "A summary of the circular economy attributes and supporting technology"]
[Slide is titled "Current state of Digital Twins - Examples." The text "Bioeconomy and regeneration" is next to a graphic of a forest water cycle and a mechinal drone.]
[Slide is titled "Current state of Digital Twins - Examples." The text "Emergency response and safety" is next to a map of the Christchurch region with flood risk areas highlighted in red.]
[Slide is titled "Current state of Digital Twins - Examples." The text "Interaction with city structure" is next to a map of the Welington region with a side panel showing live transport data.]
[Slide is titled "Current state of Digital Twins - Examples." The text "Machine learning and standards interoperability" is next to a 3D image render of pipes.]
[Slide is titled "Current state of Digital Twins - Examples." The text "User Engagement and behaviour analysis" is next to a map of the Auckland region with swimming areas highlighted.]
[Slide reads: "Use case walk through CE focus"]
[Slide reads: "What is a Digital Twin? A digital twin is typically considered a digital replica mapped onto a living or non-living entity. It is a dynamic and interconnected digital representation of a physical asset or system, enabling comprehensive insights and informed decision making.
[Slide reads: "What is a circular economy?
[Slide reads: Nextspace. Nextspace is a cloud based platform for building mantaining and visualising digital twins. The platoform allows for different data formats and sources can easily transistion between teams as the asset moves across life stages. The whole process is governed by a GUID-based ontology, in which every component has its own unique ID, allowing proper data storage and connection with other digital twins without the need for data harmonisation."]
[Slide reads: The Wellington City twin has the purpose of showcasing the multitude of real-time activity and to create a platform where decision making could be enhanced. It uses smart city technologies, with real time data to provide transportation statistics; air traffic visualisations; cycle sensor data; and car park availability.]
[Slide shows a QR code and reference number underneath a Slido rating scale. Text reads: "What level of understanding of digital twin technology do you have? 1 is 'None' and 5 is 'I build them'."]
[Slide shows a decorative graphic of interconnected globes and city buildings in desaturated primary colours. The connections evoke brain synapses. Slide reads: "Optimising building asset management: The role of Digital Twin" above the aurecon logo "Bringing ideas to life".]
[Slide shows just the isometric building.]
[Slide shows the bottom of the North Island with a circled blue city symbol over Wellington.]
[Slide text reads "Forest flows. The bold goal of this programme is to create a new biophysical forest hydrology model combining cutting edge remote sensing techniques with terrestrial based measurements, integrating data and enabling scale, as a digital model applicable to planted forests all over New Zealand. These extrapolations will be made possible through detailed analysis and simulation capability, and coupled with powerful tools including visualisation and enabling access to insights, achieving the forest digital twin will be a major breakthrough for hydrology research internationally."]
[Slide text reads "Urban flood Digital twin (Christchurch City Council). The MBIE funded Building Innovation Partnership undertook an exploration of a common referenc eframework to bring together all the disparate information sources needed for flood modelling to test the resilience of infrastructure to flood events. The pilot is being leveraged into a Christchurch digital twin and in work by the NZ Geospatial Research Institute to democratise access to flood assessment modelling."]
[Slide text reads: "Safe Swim is a collaborative programme providing real time advice on the level of risk associated with swimming at specific locations, allowing beach users to make informed decisions about when and where to swim. Safe swim is a partnership between Auckland council and other regional councils, Surf Life Saving New Zealand, Surf Life Saving Northern Region and Auckland Regional public health service."]
[Slide titled "Digital Twin timeline"]
[The cursor selects '4D' from a drop down menu that includes 'architectural' and then 'structural' options. Text on screen reads: "Switch between the layers of your BIM model"]
[The next slide is labelled "Construction phase" and shows a recording of a desktop window. A cursor selects a button labelled "BIM compare" and a "handle" slider splits the screen between a photograph of a building under construction and a building model. Text on screen instructs users to click and drag the "handle" to compare the in progress construction with the model of the same building.]
[The next slide is labelled "Summary" and shows a map of New Zealand. 5 circled symbols appear around another circle of 3 arrows feeding into each other. The 5 symbols are a pencil over a drawing of a cog on paper, a cog, location symbol and a person linked in a triangle, a crane and building under construction, completed city buildings above half an underground cog and the crane and wrecking ball.]
[The next slide is labelled "Usage phase" and shows Mary Jane's dashboard again. The dashboard now shows a larger version of the isometric building image with the roof highlighted in red and the word "Usage" circled. A stock photo of pink bats is to the left above 2 graphs showing data on the wear and tear of insulation in the building and comparing materials.]
[The recording continues, showing a calendar and timeline options. Text reads: "Calendar: The BIM calendar highlights milestones in the 4D timeline and selects the closest one." "Timeline: Use the timeline on the bottom of the screen to see progress".]
[The video opens on a slide show. Text on screen reads "Workshop: The potential for Digital Twin technology to accelerate the transistion to a circular economy. Welcome."]
[Timeline over 2 slides reads:
a $120 million cap on eligible expenditure
a 366 day year they would accrue 4.0103 weeks AL entitlement . 5 Average weekly earnings are worked out by calculating the employee’s gross earnings over the 12 months prior to the end of the last pay period before the AL is taken and
a base rate for wages or salary plus
a crime involving dishonesty within the meaning of section 2 of the Crimes Act 1961.
a cycle trail technical expert
a day of leave would now be simpler for annual leave, payroll systems would still need to be capable of implementing the calendar day methodology for FBAPS leave for cases where agreement to depart from the default was not reached. MBIE recommends removing the calendar day methodolog y for FBAPS leave 28. We recommend including a proposal in your May Cabinet paper to remove the ‘calendar day’ aspect of the methodology for determining the hours an employee would have worked on a day for both annual leave and FBAPS leave. In situations where an employee does not have clear daily hours of work , the hours an employee would have worked on a day of leave would, for all leave types, instead be based on an employee’s average hours across all days worked in the pay periods that started in the 13 weeks before the one in which the leave is taken. 29. Thi s change would prevent employers from needing to make the extensive and costly pa yroll system changes that ha ve been a key area of concern for payroll pr oviders.
a day on which schools are closed.
a dual regulatory role, with building consent authorities undertaking daily operations
a further increase to 26 weeks from 1 July 2020.
a gree that the commencement clause of the Bill provides that the rest of the Bill will come into force
a gree that the commencement clause provides that the changes agreed by Cabinet in 2020 to the PLEPA
a high level of priority in your future work programme. 33. Progressing a Bill will require prioritisation of MBIE policy and
a minimum R&D expenditure threshold of $50,000 per year, unless the expenditure related to R&D contracted out to an Approved Research Provider
a more comprehensive picture of what research is being undertaken
a new organisational support component for early- and mid-career Fellows
a new way to return abandoned rental properties to the market more quickly.
a participant code of conduct
a proposal template that provides guidance on to prepare your proposal and the information you are required to provide.
a proposed approach to pro-rating sick leave so that there is some proportionality to how much an employee works
a public holiday for the purpose of the Holidays Act 2003, and that Act will apply, with any necessary modifications, to the observance of the day; and
a requirement to compare two calculations for all employees ( O rdinary L eave P ay
a robust measure of the impact of the effectiveness of the activities, ideally in terms of visitor numbers and/or visitor spend.
a senior official from Tourism New Zealand
a senior official from the Department of Conservation.
a senior official from the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE)
a single-source of data about the system that can inform policy and investment decisions
a small working group of representatives from Business New Zealand and the Council of Trade Unions . We will continue to work through proposals with this group,
a statistical profile of migrant youth based on Immigration New Zealand data and Statistics New Zealand data:
a statutory declaration related to their criminal records, if any
a strategic view across all workstreams to ensure policy proposals will meet the development goals we seek in the Pacific, with a particular focus on the impacts of the scheme on Pacific labour markets
a streamlined application process
a uthorise the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety to make further decisions
a weeks - based AL accrual s ystem , along with a clear set o f
a weighted-average regional fuel tax has been added to the duties, taxes and direct levies data to account for the 10 cents per litre tax applicable only in the Auckland region.
able to sub-contract the work, and
about how to contact the union; and
above, the amendment would only impact a small percentage of applicants and any increase in
abused, (whether physically, emotionally, or sexually)
accelerate the growth of talent and skills in our local film industry
accelerate uptake of automation, Artificial Intelligence, data analytics and better technology across both the public sector and the wider economy.
access that information; and, if applicable
accessing advice and support via the Camms reporting tool, and/or
accommodation, health, pastoral care, benefits and deductions, and worker rights and addressing exploitation risks
acknowledge the source and copyright status of the material.
across all registers and revoking some fees.
acting in accordance with or complying with the law and legislation
actions of a member of the Board Appointments and Governance team, or
activities . This would have a negative impact on the development of a space industry in New Zealand encouraging an interest in space activities in the wider community in New Zealand.
added value to the tourism and visitor economy
additional $30 million to support conservation visitor related experiences.
addressing regulatory duplication, gaps, errors, and inconsistencies within and between different pieces of legislation
addressing zero-hour contracts.
adjusting for changes in prices, real growth from 2010 was estimated at 2.6%.
adjusts this forecast when Statistics New Zealand releases its latest data.
advice to the Minister for Media and Communications on the recommendations made by the Telecommunications Commissioner
affixed to, impressed or printed on postal articles
agree to use a third party to help them (eg, privately contract with a mediator)
agreement that the exposure draft includes an 18 - month implementation period.
all competitors to Chorus and Vodafone being able to access rural broadband infrastructure funded by the government on a non-discriminatory basis.
all', with its role to create better outcomes for all New Zealanders, particularly by supporting business growth.
allow some paper-based legal requirements to be met with electronic technology that is functionally equivalent to legal requirements.
allowing workers to resign and still receive payments
allows our visitors to have a positive experience of our country, and
an Atmospheric science programme, funded from Catalyst: Strategic over 4 years
an annotated bibliography of research reports and other publications focused on the challenges facing migrant youth settling in New Zealand and in other migrant-receiving countries:
an authority, a tribal group
an average of productivity or incentive payments received plus
an emergency response protocol to ensure a coordinated response to any future major underground mining emergency
an estimated 67 per cent of private rental properties are insulated to the required standard, an increase of 7 per cent since July 2016
an exposure draft in S eptember 2024 ;
an increase from 18 to 22 weeks from 1 July 2018
an offence against any of sections 6, 7, 9 or 12 of the Misuse of Drugs Act 1976
an offence against sections 20, 23 or 24 of the Postal Services Act 1998 that relate to divulging information from a postal article, unlawfully opening a postal article, or posting a dangerous item
an open access national database of foods and nutrients.
an opportunity to simplify the overall system , but this would require trade - offs and there would be a number of design
an optimal outcome from both employer and employee perspective s.
an overall approach to consultation on the exposure draft of the Bill
an upgrade path to 4G if this is rolled out by Vodafone in the future, which will enable even higher speeds to be offered
analysis on the structure and dynamics of the industry
anchor product prices should become purely cost-based
and Mines Rescue (Levy) Regulations 2014, to support the functions of the Mines Rescue Service.
and a new hours - based A verage D aily P ay
and above the right end there is the heading:
and if so details of what and when .
and if so details of what and when.
and internships. In 2021 Ariki Creative launched a graphic novel and online resource. This project looked to further develop resources and reach from a local initiative to a national collective initiative
and our approach to the next stages. You indicated your preference to receive our advice in one package
and provides a certain regulatory environment while striking an appropriate balance with regulato ry flexibility and worker protection . Legal professional privilege
and replace it with a single, consolidated,
and risk of error . 4 An accrual rate of 0.0768 would mean that an employee would accrue 4.005 weeks AL entitlement in a 365 -day year , and 4.0155 weeks in a 366 - day year
and the Volunteers Employment Act 1973
and the extent of any further policy changes
and to ensure the details reflected the policy intent .
and what would be considered fair in some situations . This is especially the case where payments are currently based on RDP with no comparison to an average rate that incorporates all gross earnings. Payments such as penal rates and overtime rates would be included in the average hourly rate and apply to all hours on any day, regardless of whether those rates would have actually applied.
and worker representatives
and would like to join, you need to check the eligibility information first.
and you will be sent a Price Book covering all providers.
annual and public holidays (including payment)
another regulator, oversight agency, or concerns body;
any other matters that the Minister considers relevant.
any period of a partial strike that occurred before the Bill comes into force.
any risks to national security, public safety, international relations, or other national interests;
any similar offence from another country.
anyone we believe could provide information that is relevant to whether to investigate a concern, or to an investigation or inquiry, including witnesses to concern matters;
apply to the district court for an order to dispose of seized postal articles
are a public servant from a core government department applying for a role on a Crown board, although Ministers may exercise discretion to allow appointments (see Cabinet Office circular CO(02) 5), or
are able to access relevant and quality education and training.
are able to combine work, care and social responsibilities without being disadvantaged
are aware of but will help to
are aware of the individual and collective responsibilities expected from board members, for example:
are based on an employee’s relevant daily pay (RDP) or, if it is not possible to determine RDP or an employee’s daily pay varies in the pay perio d, an employer may use ADP . I n some circumstances
are confident about employing people from diverse backgrounds and understand the advantages of a diverse workplace
are disqualified under section 30 of the Crown Entities Act 2004 for Crown entity boards or section 151(2) of the Companies Act 1993 for companies, or
are more likely to report that they are in jobs that match their skills and qualification (68%) compared to recent migrants overall (58%). However, 2015 our research on skilled migrants report that skilled migrants from the Pacific had high employment rates, but they have lower levels of income due to the high proportion in lower skilled work.
are on our employment website.
are options about whethe r to release the Bill in whole or in part. We propose to release a Bill that is close to complete –
are protected from exploitation
are published on MBIE’s website, available to anyone who wishes to access it , and
are supported to fulfil their employment aspirations and are able to access rehabilitation and/or re-training when disability or health conditions impact on how they participate in the labour market
as Employment Relations Authority and Employment Court cases, will also be monitored.
as an employee or agent of a postal operator
as soon as possible, and make sure to include your customer and indicate that your application is being sponsored by MBIE.
as soon as possible, in order to support the release of
assess agency commercial capability through the Procurement Capability Index
assess it to make sure it is a complaint that MBIE can investigate, or needs to be referred to an appeal, disputes, mediation process or other agency etc
assessment, and forms the basis of the contract for successful projects.
at least the minimum wage
attract more high-quality foreign direct investment into New Zealand to grow the economy, and
authority delegated by Cabinet , the
avoid potentially harmful interference with the activities of others in the peaceful exploration and use of outer space; or
b Note that there has been widespread (often unintentional) non- compliance with the Act , which has resulted in significant economic impacts and that, along with problems with the implementation of the Act , the design of the legislation makes it difficult to apply in practice. Noted
b. Circular practices in buildings and infrastructure, agriculture and food and manufacturing will provide significant emissions savings, over time, and have impacts for productivity, jobs and supply chain resilience Circular econo my practices can reduce resource extracti on, loss of resources and waste generation, and through this, lower emissions. Opportunities for emission savings were identified for New Zealand through adoption of circular approaches in building, agriculture and food , and in manufacturing. Approaches include, for example using recycled, reused or renewable materials for buildings, the use of more local and organic alternatives to imported fertiliser, and greater product durability of man ufactured goods . In these areas, emission savings were able to be quantified for eight interventions with a total savings of 1.5-1.9 Mt CO2e on the annual emission level . Opportunities related to more resource -efficient building accounted for most of thes e quantified savings . This analysis was supported by material flow analysis, displayed in Sankey diagrams, eg as illustrated in Figure 2. For reference, the savings quantified are equivalent to about three per cent reduction on New Zealand’s 2021 net emiss ions. 6 Further emissions savings are possible over time, f or example, a saving of 1.5 Mt CO 2e per annum was estimated to be achievable in 50 years’ time if residential buildings are designed to last 100 years, rather than 50 years . Many other opportunities for emissions savings through circularity approaches exist that were not identified or quantified in this research. These include those from emerging or long -term change such as designing buildings for reuse, reducing consumption of resources, and agricul tural and manufacturing practices that enable storage or sequestration of carbon. These savings would be in New Zealand domestic emissions production, as well as global emissions in products that we import and consume. Other impacts of circular approaches identified in the research though not quantified were: • greater productivity through more efficient use of physical resource inputs for manufacturing • maintaining trade and export competitiveness • opportunities to mitigate supply chain risk and increase economic resilience , for example through enabling durability, reuse, repair, recovery and local sourcing of critical materials • new and changed jobs, for example job gains in repair and remanufacturing and job losses in packaging and waste man agement • protection of natural capital . These impacts have particular relevance to manufacturing and point to opportunities for circular approaches to strengthen the performance of New Zealand manufacturing and its contribution to GDP and exports. Our research identified that industry is wanting to shift to more resource efficient circular practices, and are open to collaborating across industry and with government, but need access to better data to support decision -making. International e xperience shows that transitioning to a more circular econ omy is both rewarding and challenging, requiring comprehensive approaches and sustained action over decades. Sustained action is particularly important for buildings and infrastructure, wh ere the benefits of greater durability manifest not at the point of construction, but at the time when these assets would otherwise have been replaced.
balance profit with achieving wider social and environmental good
be a source of information about Auckland.
be come entitled to four weeks’ AL Confidential advice to Government Confidential advice to Government 2324- 2225 4 after 12 months continuous employment but, in addition to AL entitlement , an employer must not unreasonably withhold consent to an employee’s request to take ‘AL in advance on a pro -rata basis ’ (the amount of the four -week entitlement they have ‘earned’ eg one week after three months, two weeks after 6 months etc) [CAB -20-MIN-0100]. The recommended implementation approach adds complexity , when opportunity exists to simplify 6. The Taskforce’s recommended approach to providing earlier access to AL adds complexity to the legislative framework . It creates three separate concepts related to AL with different rules that apply to each: • AL entitlement that has arisen • pro-rata AL in advance, and • AL in advance of pro -rata AL in advance. It explicitly requires that when pro- rata AL in advance is taken it must be displayed as a negative AL balance in an employee’s leave record. 7. The key reason the Taskforce recommended this approach was concern about the compliance issues that have been associated with accrual -based AL entitlement systems that do not maintain a clear separation between an employee’s pot of entitled and accruing AL. Such systems have been used by many employer s who already allow employees to take AL in advance on a pro- rata basis . The Taskforce viewed the separation between concepts as important for audit and compliance checking purposes. P roblems that have arisen include: • employees being provided less than their four-week AL entitlement after 12 months continuous employment due to the use of incorrect leave accrual rates • underpayments for AL at the end of employment due to oversight and/or inability to distinguish and pay entitled and accruing leave out at the different rates • units of entitlement other than weeks being used and accrued balances not being adjusted when work patterns change to reflect the employee’s working week. 8. The recommended approach reinforces the need for the complex work arounds many employers have needed to build into (well- intentioned) accrual systems to ensure compliance. These work arounds , especially the se paration between entitled and accruing AL and the rules that apply to each, are also confusing for both employers and employees . We recommend inclu ding a weeks- based AL entitlement accrual system in the exposure draft of the E mployment (Leave Entitlements) Bill (the bill) 9. The 2020 Cabinet decision misses an opportunity to make more substantial changes (within the underlying weeks -based entitlement system) to the end -to-end framework for the provision of AL entitlement that would help to simplify it and improve workability and ease of understanding ( paragraph 63 -69 below discuss complexities that remain in the weeks -based entitlement system and alternative accrual systems that could be considered) . Many of the compliance issues with accrual systems have arisen inadvertently because of the challenge of designing an accrual system that is compatible with the current rules. 2324- 2225 5 10. We recommend including a proposal in your May Cabinet paper that, rather than retain the rule that four weeks AL entitlement arises as a single amount after 12 months continuous employment, we shift to a weeks -based accrual system . The system would treat all weeks of AL an employee has earned as a single, continuously accruing, pot of AL entitlement that an employer could not, without sound business reasons, withhold consent to an employee taking. This proposal would support the common practice of AL entitlement accrual by incorporating the concept within the legislative framework. 11. In addition to removing the concept of ‘continuous employment’ (discussed further below) from the legislation and clauses of the Bill that specify the rules about the calculation and taking of pro -rata leave in advance, other key areas a week s-based accrual system would simplify include: • The rules for paying employees for their AL entitlements when employment ends : Under the Act, when an employee’s employment ends, the employer must pay the employee for AL they have ‘earned’ but that has not yet arisen as entitlement at eight per cent of their gross earnings since they last became entitled to AL , less payments for any AL taken in advance. The employer must also pay the employee for untaken AL entitlement that has arisen using the normal ‘greater of’ payment methodologies. This issue was not addressed in the changes agreed by Cabinet in 2020, but the methodologies are a core source of compliance issues . Employers struggle to understand the requirements and employees struggle to understand their final pay . Over and under payments also arise when leave has been taken in advance during employment. A weeks -based accrual system would make the eight percent of gross earnings methodology redundant as the AL the payments cover would be AL considered entitlement and the second methodology would apply . 2 • Closedown provisions: Accrual would enable consolidation of the provisions as references in the framework to pro -rata leave in advance will all be covered by AL entitlement. It would also make t he Cabinet decision to provide ability for employers and employees to nominate a date AL entitlement arises when the employer has a closedown custom redundant. The intent was to provide for employees to have AL entitlement to use during a closedown period that occurs in the first year of employment. An accrual system means an employee will already have the equivalent amount of AL entitlement at that date. • Leave records and pay statements: The requirement to maintain a distinction between entitled and accruing leave in leave records and in the new requirements for inclusions on a pay statement would be removed . We recommend clear parameters to support a weeks- based accrual system 12. We recommend seeking Cabinet agreement to include a clear set of parameters that would support the operation of a weeks -based entitlement system and minimise the risk of the compliance issues the Taskforce was concerned about. We recommend specifying a weekly accrual rate 13. To minimise legislative complexity , provide certainty and support compliance, we propose to specify a minimum number of weeks that accrue for each completed week of
be considered and adopted by policy teams and programme administrators when considering how to design financial capability programmes for Pacific Peoples.
be exempt from liability if letters are lost or delayed.
be led by an RTO which will be the contracted party for this funding and be responsible for delivery of the project
be managed by the applicant but can be delivered by a service provider
be more targeted in your market research
be no more than one-year of data collection
be of broader public good (that is, the provision of foundational/core data that is either a national solution, and or is nationally replicable/scalable)
behaviour that endangers the health and safety of yourself or others
benchmark performance with your competitors and better understand your own industry sector.
board appointment processes employed by the team.
brief details of the proposed business
brief you on the submissions as soon as possible after the consultation period closes an d work with you to decide which areas to prioritise for further policy and/or drafting work prior to introduction .
broadcasting Morse Code messages across the world on amateur radio frequencies. Students around the world will be able to receive these messages
building procurement and property capability within their agency through training and development opportunities, and other tools and resources
building regional human capacity
building resilient connections to the workplace.
burden should be the minimum necessary to meet the objectives of safe, secure and inter nationally credible space industry. Any c osts imposed need to be proportionate to benefits . • We can rely on best -practice international standards to manage certain risks that arise from space activities, such as orbital debris. These are well understood , acceptable and subject to regular review by technical experts , such as the scientific and technical subcommittee of the United Nations Committee of the Peaceful Uses o n Outer Space ; and • The OSHAA Act requires the regulator to be satisfied before granting a launch licence , launch facility licence or (non -aircraft) HAV licence that the applicant has , and will continue to take, all reasonable steps to manage risks to public safety. The information regulations will require a safety case (pursuant to the OSHAA regulation making power) and prescribes the key elements of a safety case. These are couched as high -level requirements to accommodate a range of practices . Our working assumption is that New Zealand’s existing domestic law (including the Health and Safet y at Work Act 2016 ) is adequate to manage safety on the ground , but the test in the OSHAA is a broader test. In order fo r the Minister to be satisfied that the public safety test has been met, we will work with other domestic regulators (including Worksafe) to ensure a shared understanding of the risks and how these are being managed. This is particularly the case where a foreign licence may deal with some aspects of public safety in relation to the launch vehicle but where this may not be sufficient to address all aspects of safety during the operation . 25. Key information gaps relate to : • The volume of space and high -altitude activities that will need to be managed under the regime, particularly the number and frequency of payload launches ; • The different types of international collaborations that may arise in relation to space activities, including for example collaborations between domestic and foreign universities. The nature of the collaboration will have implications for whether a licence or permit is required for the activity and the identity of the applicant. This will require us to provide clear information and guidance a bout what activities the regime applies to and to develop strong relationships with industry and universities ; and • There are also info rmation gaps with respect to HAV activities where our knowledge of the different participants, types of HAV activit ies and HAV development opportunities is limited. 26. These information gaps are not unusual for a new regulatory regime and have informed our judgements about t he approach we are taking in respect of the regulations. Problem definition for application requirements 27. Clauses 8(2), 16 (2), 24(2), 32(2), 39(2) and 47(2) of the OSHAA Act require applications for licenses to be made in accordance with prescribed requirements . 28. Clause 88(1) authorises regulations prescribing information to be given in, or in connection with , applications for licences and permits . This which may include, without limitation, requirements for a safety case, an environmental impact assessment and requirements for an orbital debris mitigation plan. Amendments made to clause 9 of the OSHAA Act during Select Committee require the Minister to be satisfied that there is an orbital debris mitigation plan that meets prescribed standards. Without any regulations to stipulate what must be provided with those applications, applicants could not meet this requirement . 9
business.govt.nz on YouTube
but have been constrained by the ambiguity within the legislation itself.
but welcome your views on this.
by the end of the first pay period within which an employee will be paid for the period in which the partial strike (or part of a partial strike) occurred.
calculation comes into force from the start of the financial year (1 July) following the date on which the Bill receives Royal assent and that it applies to parental leave applications received
calculation in the Act but would provide a formula that makes it clear and possible to calculate the variable components ( e.g.
calculation. The proposed methodology would include the current
call us from overseas: +64 9 927 5905
call us within NZ: 0800 33 77 33
can access a wider range of products and services over and above basic postal services.
can identify ways in which the proposed installation will unreasonably impact on their enjoyment of the property, or worsen an existing problem with the property, other than by having a visual impact alone
can receive personal assistance from an NZ Post employee or agent
can show that the installation will have a materially negative impact on the value of their property
can show that the proposed installation will impede their plans for development of the property
cap-setting process, allocation methodology, labour market test, compliance, and flexibility
carrying out telemetry, tracking and control of spacecraft
case studies of increasing value while lowering environmental impact, and
central & local government.
change s address technical issues identified and simplify them where possible but do not depart from the underlying intent of the Taskforce’s recommendations. The Parliamentary Counsel Office has begun drafting a Bill 28. Drafting a Bill that accurately reflects the policy intent of the changes, correctly captures the technical details of the calculations, reconciles the changes with the existing provisions of the Act, and is accessible for users is a highly technical process. 29. MBIE issued the first set of drafting instructions to the Parliamentary Counsel Office ( PCO ) in July 2022. Following this, PCO began drafting the “Employment (Leave Entitlements ) Bill ” (the Bill) which would repeal and replace the Act. As part of this process , MBIE shared the Bill with the nominated representatives of
changes to Australian sustainability and recyclability requirements which New Zealand exporters will need to meet as part of Australia's 2025 National Packaging Targets.
changing the system for managing earthquake-prone buildings
child trafficking and smuggling
children being moved across borders under fraudulent identities
clarify their interaction with leave entitlements), and changes to remove the AL
clarifying and updating statutory provisions in each Act amended, to better give effect to the purpose of that Act and its provisions
classification and reporting on:
clearer-record keeping requirements
clearly indicates to the public that postal articles have been, or are intended to be, accepted for delivery by that postal operator.
collecting and recording data on the radiation present in low Earth Orbit
collecting data from space to investigate whether there is a link between with atmospheric activity and tectonic activity on Earth
collects information about dispute resolution approaches and outcomes
commercial sexual exploitation of children, including through digital forums
commission and overtime) in every case.
commitment to cooperation with scientists from other APEC member economies
communicates with applicants, and
community and social service providers
community renewable energy.
companies (eg, an employee in dispute with an employer)
comparative emissions profiles
compensation for humiliation, loss of dignity, and injury to the feelings
compete on productivity and innovation rather than low wages.
competence-based licensing for plumbers and drainlayers (this already existed for gasfitters)
compliance and enforcement
complying with legislation, regulations and standards.
conduct extensive research and technical co-operation activities, including vocational training and management development.
conducting digital image processing and software improvement experiments as part of their study
conducting space weather experiments
considerations that would extend the timeframe for introduction of a Bill.
considering how outcomes from seismic risk requirements align with broader Government objectives.
constructing 154 new fibre-connected cell phone towers and upgrading 380 existing cell towers to enable fixed wireless broadband to rural customers, as well as improved mobile coverage
consumer harm is reduce from excessive prices and a lack of fair access to tickets.
consumers have the information they need to transact with confidence
contact the relevant government authority if a postal article or letter is found that breaks the law
contact you if they need more information
continuing to run and provide the RBA training programme throughout the country, including providing face-to-face and online learning opportunities
continuous improvement to Prosecution procedure and guidelines to incorporate the comments and expectations of the court.
continuously work to lift their management capability
contribute to New Zealand's economy.
contribute towards achieving similar rates of access to fast broadband by rural end users across all regions of New Zealand.
coordinated plan for addressing issues
copyrighted materials from other websites, or
cost will be limited to the maximum payment rate for each applicant. 23. Although the formula includes more payment types than OWP, it is likely that at present many affected applicants are not changing the automated estimate where it is not correct, meaning that IR may currently be paying some applicants a higher or lower rate than their legal entitlement. In the 22/23 financial year, of the 2,994 PPL applications where OWP was used for the payment rate only 174 were adjusted. It is therefore likely there would be little change in the actual costs of PL payments as a result. 24. Implementation costs: IR implementation costs are expected to be minimal because the proposed formula is aligned with the one already being applied4. The proposed calculation reference periods would require some relatively minor system changes.
costs to ACC are affordable, sustainable and consistent (e.g. through gradual increases)
create jobs leading to sustainable economic growth
create jobs through the design, building and maintenance of the cycle network
create rich cultural visitor experiences
creating artificial meteor showers
creating more information for the public and home-owners on the rapid building assessment system including information to help them understand what a placard on their home means.
cross-agency approach to long-term statistical, data and information priorities.
current arrangements for access to weather data
d Note that you have options on how to proceed with the Holidays Act Review including what priority to give the work, the policy direction to take (proceeding wit h the current set of recommendations and/or considering alternative ways of address ing all or some of the difficulties with the Act ) and the steps in the legislative process . Noted
d. Data , information, and digital tools can help track and manage resources more efficiently, supporting the functioning of markets and transparency for consumers Sophisticated use of data and information enabled by digital tools will be needed to significantly increase resou rce efficiency and extend the lifespan of products, buildings and infrastructure. Information will need to flow not only along supply chains, but also as feedback loops in systems to signal optimal resource use. Digital tools under development includ e sharing platforms , reverse logistic s support and product passports (which can provide advanced barcode -like information about what is in a product , how it is made and how it can be reused or recycled ). These digital tools will involve the use of artificial in telligence, big data analytics, internet of things, 3D printing, digital engineering, and digital twins. Digital twins are ‘a dynamic and interconnected digital representation of a physical asset or system, enabling comprehensive insights and informed dec ision making.’ They can help track materials in the value chain, facilitate predictive maintenance of machines, and fill gaps in information about product composition and availability to enable markets to function well for product reuse or recycling. In a manufacturing industry context, digital twins are part of the shift to Industry 4.0, allowing more automated and connected supply chain man agement. For built environment uses, digital twin technology could unlock cost and resource savings by allow ing virtual trials of design changes, material and equipment choices, and infrastructure upgrades . 10 There are a wide range of digital twins in development or early -stage use in New Zealand. Most twins are of cities, buildings, or infrastructure, often developed by councils to enable efficient design, planning and management of resources and assets. Sector -oriented R&D programmes include forest, vineyard and orchard twins to support sustainable and productive growing systems. These current uses are con sistent with circular objectives for resource efficiency. Digital twins are not yet being developed in a way to realise their full potential in New Zealand. A lack of data literacy is reducing the effective exchange and use of data. Limits in collaboration across industry and data standardisation mean digital twins are being developed without optimal interoperability. Adoption of standardised frameworks and technical capabilities, such as artificial intelligence, would enable digital twins to operate in more connected ways. Our research included a workshop designed to demonstrate the potential of digital twin technology in the built environment and for other applications (Figure 3).
data and analysis on the current use of biological resources
deal with the design, construction and use of works, installations, fittings and appliances
deal with the importation and sale of fittings and appliances
define requirements for safety management systems
define the expectations and rules governing prosecutions decision making and prosecution proceedings
deliver all funded activities between April and July 2025
deliver significant reforms in key infrastructure sectors, including transport, energy, housing and public services.
demonstrate collaboration between all organisations involved in the application
demonstrate how planned activities will boost international visitor numbers quickly
demonstrate how planned activities will increase regional dispersal of international visitors quickly
demonstrate regions have capacity to host the additional international visitors
demonstrating audio, video and data file transfer capabilities between ground facilities and the payloads
deregulates copper fixed line access services in areas where fibre services are available to consumers, while retaining regulation in areas where fibre is not available
describes a regulatory regime for a public audience.
describes the roles and functions of the various parts of the regulatory regime
destination brand building and improving the visitor experience
detect and prevents criminal offending.
detecting, investigating and prosecuting criminal offending (e.g. fraud, migrant exploitation, breaches of the law such as the Immigration Act 2009, and Crimes Act 1961)
develop a consistent methodology for collecting and analysing trail data.
developing a blueprint for the future build of telecommunications infrastructure
developing additional guidance for territorial authorities and senior decision makers for readiness, response, recovery and risk-reduction activities
developing new areas of carbon sequestration, such as the coastal and marine environment.
development of high value bio-based products, for example using algae from the marine environment for pharmaceuticals, fertiliser, food, animal feed and other uses
digital and special effects
discounted price less duties, taxes, levies, the New Zealand Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS), and
disputes ownership of property that the proposed installation will make use of or disturb
diversify and shift into higher value, more productive, and more knowledge intensive activities
dividing that figure by 52. The Act defines gross earnings as including all payments that the employer is bound to make under the employment agreement or legislation (which differs from gross income for tax purposes) . Confidential advice to Government, Free and frank opinions Confidential advice to Government 2324- 2225 7 19. To align with the proposal in paragraph 16 above, we propose the following formula to provide clarity about the AWE divisor reduction for a part week of unpaid leave: Number of hours of unpaid leave taken in the week (up to the value of the denominator), divided by the employee’s average number of guaranteed hours per seven -day period. The rules for taking, allowing and requiring AL would require adjustments to reconcile with weeks -based accrual 20. The provisions in the Act that set out employees’ rights to take AL and when an employer may require an employee to take AL are based on entitlement arising after a fixed period. These are set out in column one of Table One below. They would require adjustment s to reflect an accrual -based framework . 21. The intent of the provisions in the Act is to provide a balance between employer and employee interests. The scheme anticipates, in the first instance, an employee applying for AL and the parties attempting to agree.6 It provides flexibility for employers to be able to withhold consent to an employee’s request to take AL but that, within a window of 12 months after the date on which the entitlement arises , an employer must allow an employee to take the AL. It also allows an employer to require an employee to take AL that has arisen but only in specified circumstances. 22. We consider the current balance of interests is appropriate, and so we recommend seeking agreement in your May Cabinet paper to adjustments that are aligned with the general intent of the current provisions. Simplicity was also a key criterion, and we considered other options that would maintain precise alignment with the status quo but would have required employers to separate accrued entitlements into annual buckets to distinguish which rules applied to which AL entitlement. This would have added additional record -keeping requirements and complexi ty. 23. Our proposals are included in column two of Table One. The exposure draft will provide opportunity to seek feedback on the proposed adjustments. Table One: proposed adjustments to the rules for taking and requiring employees to take AL Status q uo Proposed rules to reconcile with an accrual system When any AL is to be taken it must be agreed between the employer and employee. When any AL is to be taken it must be agreed between the employer and employee. An employer must not unreasonably withhold consent to an employee’s request to take AL entitlement that has arisen (after 12 months continuous employment) .
do not experience discrimination in the workplace
do not have the legal right to work in New Zealand.
do not impose unnecessary complexity and compliance costs, and
do not receive confirmation that your application has been received
do not sell or distribute any material on a commercial basis
document, even though we have been running through these very quickly, we had a look at a high-level at the situation in our major various streams and our capabilities.
domestic satellite broadband terminals
don't use the material in a derogatory manner or a misleading context
drafting instructions to PCO
during reflect s the status quo 14. For the exposure draft, we propose that AL entitlement would accrue during all weeks of employment that are included in ‘ 12 months of continuous employment’ under the Act. It would accrue during any period an employee was on paid leave, unpaid sick , bereaveme nt or family violence leave, parental leave, voluntary military service leave
e Agree to meet with officials to discuss next steps for the Holidays Act Review . Agree/Disagree
eInvoicing and how it benefits you
eInvoicing status (if your finance system is capable of sending us an eInvoice)
each of these stakeholders and invite
early learning, engagement and attainment in schooling
economic or other benefits to New Zealand of the proposed operation;
education and employment service providers
efficient and low-emissions transport
either Option One or Option Two, the next steps would include additional drafting to develop an improved draft Bill, followed by an exposure draft consultation process to test the workability and cost implications of the draft provisions with employers, e mployees and payroll providers. Option Two would require further drafting instructions to be issued to reflect the policy changes. The consultation will also provide the opportunity to consult with relevant population groups and ask targeted questions to u nderstand their views. MBIE will ensure that representatives of Māori, Pacific peoples, ethnic communities, disabled people, women and rural communities are invited to make a submission.
electronic means do. To address this issue, LINZ has suggested that the wording of this section could be amended to require launch licensees to notify LINZ of rocket launches that have safety implications for mariners, but not go as far as to specify how L INZ provides this information to mariners. ANALYSIS AND RESPONSE At the time the Act was first developed, the FAA’s launch licence (which Rocket Lab holds and which New Zealand recognises within the regime) included a requirement to issue a notice for mariners . This requirement has now been removed from the FAA licen sing requirement on the basis that alternative means of publishing the fact the launch is taking place and the areas in in which it may pose a danger to mariners achieve an equivalent level of safety.
email New Zealand Cycle Trails
email address for payment enquiries
emerging market and market opportunity reports
employees earn AL entitlement reflect s the status quo
employee’s hours and rates of pay vary between days of work, the methodology leads to them receiving more or less than they would have if they worked on a specific day. Cabinet agreed to changes to the methodology for calculating FBAPS pay 5. To address the issues with FBAPS leave payments , in 2020 Cabinet accepted the Holidays Act Taskforce’s recommended new methodology which includes two new calculations which employers must pay employees the greater of. The intent was to eliminate the requirement to choose which calculation to use, while ensuring that no employees would be financially disadvantaged by being on leave. The new calculations are: a. Ordinary Daily Leave Pay (ODLP): the amount an employer is required to pay an employee under their employment agreement for a relevant day. It inclu des wages/salary, fixed allowances and the cash value of board and lodgings .3 b. New Average Daily Pay (ADP): ADP is also a new calculation that differs from the one with the same name under the current Act by changing the basis from days to hours. It aims t o make the calculation result more specific to a particular day. It is calculated by multiplying an hourly rate4 by the number of hours the employee would have worked on a day in question (determined in accordance with a prescribed methodology). Issues w ith the Taskforce’s proposals were identified during the policy design process 6. The 'great er of’ comparison removes the requirement to apply judgement in deciding whether to use RDP or ADP , making it easier for businesses to comply in some situations . However, in other cases it would add complexity by introducing the requirement to make and compare two calculations. For employees whose hours of work are clear and who do not have variable components of pay , RDP is currently a very si mple and fair calculation. 7. The new A DP calculation and comparison may inflate payments above what an employee would have
employers to allow employees to take AL in advance during a closedown .
employment service providers and employers.
enable economic activity and growth.
enable more quality infrastructure, by reducing the roadblocks to its delivery, and
enable sponsored refugees, with the support of community organisations, to quickly become independent and self-sufficient
enabling workers to take unpaid parental leave flexibly
encourage employment opportunities
encouraged year-round tourism to a greater number of regions
encourages businesses, individuals, households, community institutions and public sector agencies to take actions to help unlock our renewable energy and energy efficiency potential, to the benefit of all New Zealanders
energy affordability and hardship
engage in lifelong learning with opportunities to train and work at the same time
engage with the tertiary education sector and industry bodies to convey their skills needs
enhance social protection
enhanced the productivity of tourism businesses, drove innovation and supported professional tourism career development
enhancing climate mitigation and resilience
ensure education, training and immigration settings support economic growth, and
ensure effective internal controls are in place over the prosecution decision making process
ensure regulatory compliance, and
ensuring a healthy, safe and secure environment
ensuring housing and construction markets deliver safe and affordable homes and buildings
ensuring the best use of taxpayer funds
ensuring we maintain the trust and confidence of the public
entitlements are sufficient to make treatment affordable for claimants
erect public letterboxes in accordance with relevant planning rules
establish the principles to which MBIE must adhere in dealing with potential prosecutions, making prosecution decisions and conducting prosecutions and/or related proceedings.
estimated the implementation process could take up to 28 months. This would depend on a range of factors including the type of payroll system, the size of the business, the employer’s access to payroll expertise and the nature of the workforce.
excellence in scientific research, as evidenced through scholarly publication
expected to earn on the day in question
explore alternatives outside the Taskf orce’s recommendations .
explore alternatives that broadly align with the Taskforce recommendations and the underlying entitlements model , or
extending entitlements to a wider group of primary carers than just biological and formal adoptive parents
extending mobile coverage by 6,200 square kilometres to 125,700 square kilometres of rural New Zealand
extending parental leave payments to non-standard workers and those who have recently changed jobs
extending unpaid leave to workers who have been with their employer for more than six months but less than 12
f urther impact analysis to accompany the decisions in this paper, which serves as an addendum to the 2020 RIS. This analysis is attached in Appendix Five .
facilitate know-how and technology transfer to other industries
facilitate the use of electronic technology by reducing uncertainty regarding the legal effect of information in electronic form or communicated electronically
fees set by the Remuneration Authority, or
fees set by the shareholding Minister in accordance with the Crown Company Fees Methodology.
film and video distribution
find out from us whether we hold personal information about you
fixed toilet, which includes chemical and waterless toilets
focus the work health and safety system on critical risks
food safety hazards, for example biological, chemical, physical and radiological
for all entitlement note holders.
for contact information for the general public.
for ensuring employees have time away from work which we will include in your May Cabinet paper and will report back to you if we need any further decisions before then . Agree Discuss Future options for change following exposure draft Note that within a week s-based system , further opportunities , technical improvements and policy adjustments exist and we plan to i nclude targeted questions about these in the exposure draft consultation document , covering : Noted Note that we plan to also use the consultation document to ask targeted questions about an alternative hours -based accrual system and that this could provide
for further information and sign-up documents.
for help and more information.
for more information about the Act and regulations.
for more information about working in the sex industry.
for more information and to access the app.
for more information and to access the tool.
for more information on our other funding opportunities.
for more information on the successful proposals and see
for new functions under the revised regulatory regime introduced with the Incorporated Societies Act 2022.
for stakeholders within MBIE. We notify our stakeholders when the data is updated, so they can pull the new data as required.
for targeted consultation , and will seek Cabinet’s agreement to the content of the consultation document
for the R&D tax incentive).
forward during the consultation period, we can share the materials with them and invite th em to make a submission.
foundational change to the Act and shift to a system that uses hours as the unit of accrual for AL entitlement19 rather than retaining weeks as the unit of entitlement. We plan to include targeted questions on this in the exposure draft c onsultation document. 64. An hours -based accrual system could provide the opportunity to significantly simplify the leave entitlement system and provide greater alignment with the basis of other aspects of Confidential advice to Government Confidential advice to Government Confidential advice to Government 2324 - 2225 16 Confidential advice to Government 2324 - 2225 17 Confidential advice to Government
four - part test for using PAYG and a new requirement for employers to review its use every 13 weeks. This was intended t o address the current lack of clarity and requirement for judgement.
from 40 to 52 hours from 1 July 2018
from the Pacific has also been steadily increasing over the last 5 years. In 2016/17:
full details on how to apply, how your application will be assessed, what happens if your application is successful.
fund second tests for interpreters
further regulatory impact analysis.
gather together and state the generic rules and requirements for electrical safety and what is deemed to be electrically safe and unsafe
generate international recognition of the New Zealand brand.
give the Pike River families closure
good regulatory practice.
government (across all roles and responsibilities)
government - funded health sector, especially considering the
government employees with policy responsibility for an industry or sector
greater accountability and transparency arrangements for the Board including requiring the Board to produce an output agreement and an annual report to be tabled in Parliament; as well as becoming subject to the Official Information Act.
greater enforcement powers to address unsafe or unhealthy rental properties
greater participant involvement and empowerment
gross screen sector revenue increased 8% to $3.5 billion
guides the work programme of the Energy Efficiency and Conservation Authority (EECA)
has an easement over the affected property and can show that the proposed installation will have an enduring impact on the terms and conditions of that easement.
has information on our previous swimming pool safety proposals.
have a greater understanding of domestic and international visitors.
have a problem submitting your application
have a question about the recruitment process.
have access to good employment in their region and industry
have access to good information about the employment opportunities in their region and industry
have access to quality careers pathway advice
have conducted and published a public dialogue on gene editing and how it can be applied in healthcare, in pest control and in the primary industries.
have confirmed their personal details and the nature and level of their involvement in the work described in the proposal is correct, and
have diversity at all levels
have educational pathways that provide the skills needed to participate in a changing world of work, including problem-solving, creativity, agility and adaptability
have employment terms and conditions that reflect their skills, qualifications and experience and the contribution they make
have equal access to employment opportunities
have for the unique s chooling sector work and holiday arrangements .
have opportunities to retrain.
have positive, healthy workplace cultures
have strong foundation skills, including technical literacy
have the appropriate skills and experience
have the skilled workers they need to take advantage of technological advancements
have the workforce and skills planning capability and information they need to invest in the future
have time to carry out the role's duties, such as board meetings and meeting preparation, on top of your other commitments (most board roles are part-time, but some are full-time)
hazards associated with substances added to food
he telephone and video interpreting service helps government agencies to communicate with clients with limited English proficiency through telephone or video interpreters available 24 hours a day, seven days a week, in over 120 languages.
health and safety management systems
help build procurement capability and develop commercial talent through graduate programme, training and advice
help maintain the Trade in Endangered Species Act and prevent any endangered, threatened or exploited species from being imported or exported.
help prevent future mining tragedies.
help reduce barriers to support trade and investment
help solve big global issues, such as climate change or tax avoidance, where one country cannot deal with the issue on its own.
help you locate New Zealand aerospace companies, products and services.
help you locate aerospace investment opportunities in New Zealand.
helps ensure New Zealanders can continue to enjoy their public spaces at home, or around the country.
helps people understand their rights and obligations, and the opportunities available, but will also hold people to account. This group has an impact on the lives of almost every New Zealander every day be it as employee, employer, business owner, consumer, landlord, renter, new arrival and even those listening to the radio and protecting our airwaves.
high levels of collaboration between stakeholders
hold, open and examine postal articles that break certain laws
horticultural industry stats, including the wine, fruit, vegetable, and ornamental sectors
household and community energy use
household satellite receiver dishes
how space weather affects modern-day technologies
how to contact us for assistance with the application process.
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-7086-4096
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-7808-1213
http://orcid.org/0000-0003-0219-9570
https://otago.zoom.us/meeting/register/5tmnY6eJQs6WuuhmbbUczg
https://www.crimestoppers-nz.org/about/contact-us/email-anonymously
https://www.mbie.govt.nz/about/news/accelerating-building-projects-with-self-certification-and-inspection-targets
https://www.mbie.govt.nz/about/news/easter-trading-laws-your-rights-and-responsibilities
https://www.mbie.govt.nz/about/news/increased-onshore-diesel-reserves-to-improve-resilience
https://www.mbie.govt.nz/about/news/protecting-new-zealands-energy-infrastructure
https://www.mbie.govt.nz/about/news/successful-vision-matauranga-research-projects-announced-2025
https://www.mbie.govt.nz/about/news/tourism-marketing-boost-in-key-countries
https://www.mbie.govt.nz/about/who-we-are/our-external-boards/maori-economic-development-advisory-board
https://www.mbie.govt.nz/science-and-technology/space/permits-and-licences-for-space-activities/application-for-payload-permit-app001
https://www.unitedrepaircentre.com/
i nvite the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety to issue drafting instructions to PCO
i. Employee s should continue to receive their entitlement to four weeks’ leave when they have completed 12 months continuous employment, but in their first year of employment the Act should provide the ability to take annual holidays in advance on a pro -rata basis (e .g. they could take two weeks’ leave after working for 6 months). However, there should be no ability for the employer to make the employee take any annual holidays prior to formally receiving the entitlement.
i. For annual holidays , it is estimated that payments could increase across the New Zealand economy by up to $29.7 million per year. I note that testing of the Taskforce’s recommendations showed that mo st employees’ holiday pay remained the same as under the status quo. However, 34 per cent of employees in the sample received more holiday pay than they would under the current Act. Around 10 per cent of employees were worse off (most by less than 15 per cent).
i. Recommended an improved status quo model for leave and leave pay, where the existing units of entitlement are retained (weeks for annual holidays, days for all other types of leave – e.g. sick leave)
i. The Labour Inspectorate considers that retaining a complex weeks -based entitlement system for annual holidays will require a dedicated team of payroll specialists (labour inspectors) for the long -term. A similar team was established in 20 15/16 for a fixed term to undertake targeted compliance work when the extent of non -compliance with the current Act became evident, but funding for this dedicated team is currently scheduled to cease in 2020.
i. Understanding issues with the current Act . This included consulting on an Issues Paper in August 2018 which set out the group’s understanding of the key issues with the Act and suggestions for improvement. A total of 87 submissions were received from businesses, payroll practitioners and providers, and individuals.
i. continue to promote the existing purpose of the Holid ays Act 2003
i. in March 2020, Cabinet agreed to endorse in full the 22 recommendations of the Holidays Act Taskforce for improvements to the Act ii. MBIE has completed a policy design process , and iii. the Parliamentary Counsel Office commenced work on drafting a Bill but this w ork is currently on hold. Noted
identifies the common capability gaps and opportunities, through a set of goals and priorities that help us focus our efforts
identify and develop Auckland-specific policies that will promote Auckland and national economic growth
identify and recommend the optimal arrangements and responsibilities in the weather forecasting system that will best position New Zealand to meet future weather-related challenges and impacts within the context of climate change
identify areas of innovation and research and development for the future
identify strategic partners and collaborators
identify whether changes in access to weather data should be considered and if so, what these should be.
identifying and developing a list of emerging technologies that are critical to the future of New Zealand
identifying and recommending ways to address barriers to innovation and commercialisation ensuring a thriving science and innovation ecosystem, and
identifying barriers to meeting regulatory requirements and the types of support or incentives that would help building owners to better manage seismic risk
ie the biopart of the phrase, for sale in markets via economy to consumers and suppliers to them. What we realised as we thought about the problem is New Zealand has biomass production and harvesting systems and we have got to make biomass to feed into the system that biomass flows into various organisations with various names and they handle it, they sort it and they process it. It can be anything from a sawmill, a dairy plant to a fishing boat. Those primary processors produce products that often go to others for processing, a simple example of that would be milk powder then going to another processing facility to be made into infant formula, those products ultimately, and there might be multiple stages of produced products that finally go to markets.
if relevant stakeholders come
if the employer and employee agree to vary their employment agreement to state the threshold applies before the end of the transitional period, or
if you have any questions or comments about our social media engagement.
if you would like more information.
ii. Around 90 per cent of existing Holidays Act -related information and education resources will need to be updated, and additional resources will be required to explain, and assist employers to embed, the Taskforce’s recommendations (funding for staff time, new products and tools, and promotion).
ii. Devel oping and testing options. This involved developing and testing a number of options for change that were based on the views and proposals put forward by Taskforce members and via the Issues Paper consultation process. The testing was conducted by an extern al provider with expertise in payroll matters and using bona fide payroll data across a wide range of working arrangements.
ii. Employees should become entitled to bereaveme nt leave and family violence leave from their first day of employment. Employees should be entitled to one day of sick leave from their first day of employment, with an additional day per month of employment until the full entitlement of five days is reach ed after four months.
ii. Focused its work on addressing known ‘pain points’ with the current legislation
ii. For FBAPS payments , payroll testing suggested that no employees would be worse off under the Taskforce’s proposals, and most would be better off. The average daily FBAPS leave payment increased by around seven per cent. Taking into account the skewe d characteristics of the sample tested, MBIE considers that a reasonable estimate of increased FBAPS payments across the New Zealand workforce is approximately $186.7 million per year.
ii. provide clarity and certainty for employers and employees so that employees receive their correct entitlements
iii. Confirming preferred option and finalising recommendations. This involved assessing the options developed by the Taskforce against a range of criteria, consulting with a select group of payroll providers, and confirming the final recommendations in a report.
iii. Employees should have the ability to take sick leave and family violence leave in units of less than a day.
iii. There may be a case for additional resources to support any new compliance approaches that are developed to support implementation of the Taskforce’s recommendations. (For example, mechanisms that stipulate expectations around the quality and performance o f payroll products, providers, and associated systems).
iii. be simpler than the current Act in relation to the provision of, and payment for, entitlements to holidays and leave
ill on 13 May 2019, and detailed some technical changes. Second reading of the Bill took place on 24 June 2020. Prior to the Committee of the Whole House, a Supplementary Order Paper was introduced, outlining changes that align
impacts from current and possible future land uses
implementing initiatives on education, labour and capacity building.
importer cost (cost of importing the fuel to New Zealand - including the cost of purchasing the fuel in Singapore, shipping it to New Zealand, insurance and losses, and wharfage and handling).
imposing a ban on ticket-buying bots
imposing a price cap on resale tickets
improve education and skills performance.
improve outcomes for businesses, workers and all New Zealanders, and
improve the effectiveness of domestic law
improve the quality of the Bill before an exposure draft is released for consultation later this year . Together with technical refinements made so far, the changes will also demonstrate some progress from the previous Cabinet decisions.
improvements in the collection and re-use of data across the sector
improving sector productivity, that is:
improving the adventure activities audit process.
in New Zealand unlawfully because their visa has expired
in Parliament on 19 September 2018. It passed its first reading on 16 October 2018. Select Committee reported back on the
in Parliament on 19 September 2018. It passed its third reading late July
in a suitable repository that is listed in the Directory of Open Access Repositories (OpenDOAR) maintained by Jisc
in an Institutional Repository that enables Open Access; or
in order to support release of an exposure draft ( refer para 31 - 33
in recognition of the importance of dialogue and partnership between governments and the energy industry.
in some Free and frank opinions Confidential advice to Government
in standard restructuring situations.
in the first instance so that we can try to resolve the issue. We aim to respond to your email within 2 business days.
in this paper and existing Cabinet decisions
inappropriately disposing of waste
include a timeframe and milestones for delivery in the application.
include at least two RTO members in the application group
include delivering an evaluation of the impact of the funded activities by 31 December 2025.
include regional breakdowns (if appropriate)
including eligibility, payments and returning to work.
incomplete, such as the transitional provisions an d record - keeping requirements ( which are dependent on other areas of the Bill ).
increase business certainty about what to do to comply.
increase the value derived from our biological resources
increase transparency by publishing regular data on expenditure, outputs, impacts and performance of the science and innovation system
increased capital investment by firms, supported by higher domestic savings and inbound overseas investment
increased duration for early-career Fellows
increased tools for labour inspectors
increasing the penalty for fraud
increasing the scale and pace of energy and resource development to ensure secure, resilient and reliable production and supply
independently manage your complaint from the person/people who are the subject of the complaint
individuals (eg, neighbours in dispute over a shared driveway)
industry participants (businesses and individuals)
inform government policy decisions and longer-term strategy
inform researchers and professionals from all sectors of key findings on how to best promote financial capability in Pacific communities here in Aotearoa New Zealand
inform their customers about emergency call access and how to make emergency calls
information about keeping accurate records
information about opportunities and gaps in the system that can be leveraged to develop new products and services
information about our products, services and activities
information about recruitment.
information and education
information and opportunities for emerging aviation technologies and space.
information on future opportunities and threats
information on primary sector innovation
information) for personal gain or for the personal gain of another person.
innovative and efficient use of electricity
interfering with, or damaging, the environment
introducing a new employer-led visa framework that will drive the application process
inventions in all fields of human endeavour
invest in workforce planning, upskilling and developing career pathways for their workers
investigating complaints and making determinations about disputes on certain building matters
investors (domestic or international)
invitations to provide feedback on specific issues
is New Zealand’s largest employer with around 85,000 full time employees
is a new and possibly disruptive technology that not many people understand that could change the way businesses operate.
is a weekly average of retail prices in Auckland, Hamilton, Wellington, and Christchurch.
is being delivered by District Health Boards (DHB) in the 5 communities. Each DHB will tailor delivery to meet local needs, and may include mental-health first aid training, community well-being events, and other locally identified initiatives.
is on the New Zealand Gazette website.
is partially complete, with drafting based on the policy decisions made by Cabinet and previous Ministers. Those decisio ns are summarised in Annex One.
issues identified by our stakeholder working group during the 2021 - 2022 design process and considered
it results in , I anticipate
iv. Bereavement leave should be expanded to cover more family members (e.g. stepfamily, siblings -in-law and children -in-law, cultural family groups, miscarriage, and aunts, uncles, nieces and nephews).
iv. It is estimated that making bereavement, sick and family violence leave available from day one will increase costs across the New Zealand economy by around $51.9 million per year. This figure accounts for tenure and turnover rates in New Zealand and is based on assumptions on the amount of leave likely to be taken.
iv. be readily implementable in a payroll system
ix. aim to protect overall entitlements for employees.
justify why they should seek a HAV licence. They will still be required to comply with the Civil Aviation rules.
kaitiakitanga (guardianship)
kaitiakitanga (guardianship/sustainability)
keep a record of all postal articles held or opened, and allow anyone with the delegated authority of the Chief Executive of the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment access to that record
keep any held items safely before disposal
keep workers safe from harm, including from bullying and harassment
keep you updated if a response is delayed
keeping the regulatory system up to date and relevant
know how and where they can access training
know how to accommodate diverse workplace requirements, including for disabled people and people with caring responsibilities.
know where to go for support from the government (including resources and funding) to create inclusive and accessible workplaces
l ike private sector employers, are included in the exposure draft consultation process.
legal resources and of PCO drafting re s ource . Without this, it will not be possible to produce new legislation that is fit -for- purpose
less restrictive and simpler framework for using PAYG.
leveraging higher premiums from existing products
licence, payload permit and overseas payload permit. Currently, the Minister treats the following overseas licences, authorisations or ODMP as satisfying some, or all, of the regulation 13 criteria: + US Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). The FAA licence does not meet New Zealand requirements for end -of-life disposal. Applicants will also need to demonstrate compliance with this requirement + US Federal Communications Commission (FCC) for payloads with radio -communication capabilities + National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) for NASA and NASA sponsored payloads . + US Department of Defence (DoD) for US DoD or DoD authorised payloads + European Space Agency (ESA) while not a regulator or licensing body, ODMP assessed by ESA as meeting its standards, demonstrate full compliance with New Zealand requirements.
limiting 90-day trial to businesses with fewer than 20 employees.
linkages with relevant science and research providers, and programmes in New Zealand and internationally.
literary, dramatic, musical and artistic works, sound recordings and films, broadcasts
log the complaint in their register and acknowledge it
long-term picture of what is required to improve official statistics, data and information on research, science and innovation
lower their environmental impact and shift to a more sustainable use of energy and resources
maintain a profile so we can match your skills and preferences against upcoming positions
make it easier for employees to understand their entitlements.
make law easier to design, implement and enforce
makes it an offence for an operator to charge more than the maximum fee or to fail to remove a wheel clamp within a reasonable timeframe after a fee is paid
makes these offences enforceable by the New Zealand Police.
making a Report of Concern to Oranga Tamariki,
making procurement and property management easier through systems and frameworks that support quality decision making.
manaakitanga (shared respect, hospitality, generosity and care for others)
manage All-of-Government contracts for common goods and services.
manage the Government Electronic Tenders Service (GETS)
managing buildings after emergencies.
managing the system that regulates building work and monitoring its effectiveness
mark mail with their unique postal identifier
market trends information
markets are well-functioning and competitive
material on our social media pages that is protected by the copyright of a third party.
maximise opportunities for events, and a range of recreational and health benefits for New Zealanders.
measure how you use the website so it can be updated and improved based on your needs
measure progress towards a more sustainable operating model across environmental, economic, community and regional dimensions
meet the requirements set out in the position description
mental health and addiction support worker
modernising parental leave
monitoring and evaluation.
monitoring and reporting to Government on the execution and delivery of science, innovation and technology strategy, priorities and system reform.
monitoring compliance with legislative requirements and undertaking enforcement action where necessary.
monitoring the performance of councils, in relation to building work
monitoring, review and reporting on regulatory systems
months may not be enough time for all employers. Some stakeholders
more and higher value awards
more effective at managing immigration risk, and
more flexibility and less formality
more specialised and innovative solutions
most landlords and more than half of tenants are aware of changes to insulation requirements
most tenants report their private rental property has at least one working smoke alarm.
most up-to-date information about parental leave
mostly under the Samoan Quota and the Pacific Access Category. In 2016/17:
moving from a weeks-based entitlement system to a weeks-based accrual system for providing annual leave entitlement
must book a test date for NAATI test/s funded by MBIE by 5pm (New Zealand time) on 30 June 2025.
n ote that t he Bill will be binding on the Crown but, like the Holidays Act, will not apply in respect of the Armed Forces as defined in section 2(1) of the D efence Act 1990 .
n ote that, subject to the report back referred to in recommendation 10
names and addresses of individual operators or partners, or the chief executive and directors
negotiating and introducing sector agreements ensuring there is more planning for future workforce needs
new content on our other digital channels (news, publications, speeches, media releases, campaigns etc)
next steps for the Holidays Act Review
not align with Cabinet decisions.
not leaving a local authority area when required to do so by an enforcement officer.
not required to be available to work certain times, days or for a minimum period; OR
note that the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety plans to release an exposure draft of the Bill in September 2024
notify us of any changes to their registration information
notifying the Immigration New Zealand (INZ) Duty Officer or the MBIE on-call phone.
o A description of the approach taken to the safety assessment o A description of the launch vehicle and its proposed operation, including a description of all safety critical systems o Particulars of all relevant New Zealand and international standards that have been applied or will be applied in relation to the launch vehicle and its operation o A description of the safety management system the applicant has in place to: a) identify and assess the safety risks associated with the proposed launch activities and b) develop and implement safety control measures o Details of key personnel responsible for the safety of the launch activities o A description of the geographical areas likely to be affected by the launch activities and if relevant demographic information about the local community that may be affected by them o A description of known significant risks associated with the launch activities o A description of control measures in place to mitigate those risks o An emergency management plan that describes the systems, processes and procedures that will apply in the event of a major incident.
o Address o Place of organisation or incorporation o Description of the services being sub -contracted.
o balloons launched for the purposes of education by a New Zealand primary or secondary school or a New Zealand tertiary institute for the purposes of education where the payload carried by the balloon can only be used to describe or illustrate the progress of the vehicle and the payload device is an unmodified commercial off-the-shelf product, and o model rockets launched and operated by members of the New Zealand Rocketry Association (NZRA) from the NZRA launch site at Taupiri.
o fficials contact a range of stakeholders to ensure they are aware of the consultation, connect them with the materials, and invite
objective criteria for using pay-as-you-go for annual leave and a less burdensome review process, and
of the Bill and consultation document
of the Official Information Act.
of the employee in their former position or in a position no less advantageous to them,
of type "Cabinet Minute", "Cabinet Paper", "Regulatory Impact Statement"
on minor and technical matters that are in line with the policy
on our Building Performance website has Canterbury-related information and guidance for homeowners, building owners and building professionals.
on the proposals in this paper ,
open postal articles to enable them to be delivered
operational policy/service design
opportunities for improvement
or association, having a professional or legal obligation to someone else (such as being a trustee) and owning a beneficial interest in a trust/land.
or completing the online form:
or fostering an enabling environment to accomplish these goals.
or other money lost as a result of the grievance (generally up to a maximum of three months of ordinary pay, with discretion for higher reimbursement), and/or
or post your request to Ministerial Services, Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, PO Box 1473, Wellington 6140.
or was not working while receiving weekly accident compensation. AL entitlement would also accrue on the first week of any other period of unpaid leave but, unless the employer and employee agree otherwise, not on weeks beyond that (which currently extend s the date an employee receives their AL entitlement). 15.
or who has concerns about the well-being of a child or young person and the child is not in immediate danger, will first report their concerns to their Manager and together assess the best approach to take. This may involve:
other forms of leave such as sick or bereavement leave
other leave types ( Family violence leave, bereavement leave, alternative holidays, public holidays, and sick leave
other than as a business, such as if you are delivering your own mail
other things like your screen resolution, the release of your installed Flash version and the language setting of your browser.
other tweets, articles or publications of interest which are relevant to our key messages, objectives, promotions or updates
outline how our people can apply for and assess flexible working arrangement proposals in a way that is consistent, transparent, and reflective of the diversity of our people, responsibilities, and functions at MBIE.
outlines government policies, objectives and targets for 2017-2022
overall attitudes towards migrants in New Zealand
p roceed based on the existing recommendations made by the Holidays Act Taskforce and accepted by the previous Government ,
package is the work we're doing on health and safety at work legislative reform.
page for more information.
page includes information about the survey's purpose, quality targets, population, sampling, data processing, analysis and outputs.
participation in promotional and alumni activities.
partner with others to develop agreed strategies and interventions to support workforce planning, upskilling and transitions to respond to the changing nature of work.
payment overrides in the PLEPA and Volunteers Employment Protection Act 1973 , come into force two months after the date the Bill 6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:12:15 Confidential advice to Government Confidential advice to Government
payment rules, and the changes to the availability provisions in the
payments above what an employee would have expected to earn on the day in question and what would be considered fair . 14
payments are not too dissimilar across the health and ACC systems
peer country comparisons.
people and organisations authorised by the regulator or regulations to certify or licence businesses for high-risk work and activities.
performances of performing artists
periods of unpaid leave are not included in continuous employment . 18.
place workers in jobs that best match their skills and abilities
policy advice on regulation of the telecommunications sector, and the social, cultural, environmental and economic impacts of new technology
policy and technical planning advice on the allocation of the radio and broadcasting spectrums, and issues related to commercial broadcasting.
positioned to deliver a Bill for introduction in early 2025.
potential impact on some of these operators could be high as the licensing regime would impose new information and reporting requirements on them. 38. The main users affected are likely to be organisations that routinely use high- altitude balloons for weather and atmospheric monitoring including the MetService, NIWA, and Rocket Lab (who use s balloons to monitor weather conditions prior to a rocket launch) . Some universities such as Otago University, Canterbury University and Auckland University of Technology inform us that they also use high -altitude balloons for education purposes to build capacity and encourage deeper understanding of upper atmospheric processes. In addition, NASA operates an annual high- pressure balloon programme from New Zealand as part of their upper atmosphere , climate research and astronomical research programme s. Ther e may be some primary and secondary schools that occasionally launch balloons for teaching purposes. 39. Weather forecast and storm warning information is provided by the MetService under a contract with the Ministry of Transport and constitutes an important public good service for New Zealand. It is important that this service is maintained and not unduly hindered by regulation.
preparing to find and secure employment
prioritising drafting in areas that are critical for employer s. There may be some areas
privacy and confidentiality
promote accountability for this tragedy
promote competition to boost productivity and living standards
promote diversity through inclusive recruitment and retention strategies
promote employment rights
promote the involvement of central government in major regional development projects
promoting food security, safety, and agriculture biotechnology
property project management
property research and strategy.
property-related procurement
proposed three options for the next stages of the review:
protect national security or other national interests; or
protect people, information, and places
protecting organisational reputation.
provide advice on complex, risky and strategically important projects
provide an Auckland perspective in the development of central government policy
provide an opportunity for community organisations to more actively engage in supporting successful refugee settlement
provide employees the opportunity to have a better balance of personal and professional needs which can be achieved with a range of custom work settings, supporting the mental health and wellbeing of MBIE employees.
provide evidence based independent advice to the public and government.
provide fast broadband to the greatest number of under-served rural homes and businesses within the funding available
provide for installations to be designed and installed under AS/NZS 3000 (the Wiring Rules)
provide ongoing job and economic development opportunities for regional economies
provide spill-over benefits to the wider economy, including digital technology sectors.
provide you with information about doing business in New Zealand.
providers of dispute resolution services.
provides a better experience for our customers and staff.
provides for complaints and dispute resolution services. Many of these services are delivered privately within industries, sectors, and communities.
provides for technical revisions to the Telecommunications Regulatory Levy. These changes provide consistency with the levy arrangements for utility regulation under the Commerce Act
provides for the development of a new utility regulation framework for fibre fixed line access services from 2020
provides more regulatory oversight of retail service quality, associated consumer codes and dispute resolution processes in the telecommunications sector
provides scope to modernise the legislation .
provides ways for people to raise their issues
providing additional parental leave payments for parents of preterm babies.
providing advice and guidance to the Government and the wider sector on issues and topics of interest to building and construction.
providing advice to the Prime Minister on the long-term direction and high-level priorities for government-funded science, innovation and technology, along with areas that could be de-prioritised.
providing calibration points for ground based radar to assist with the tracking of orbital debris
providing commercial data connectivity services through providing low-power and low-data rate VHF communications between Earth and Space.
providing guidance to support duty holders to control energy safety risks and comply with their legal obligations; and
providing support, advice and expertise
puts in place consumer safeguards when copper services are to be withdrawn
quarterly average main port price, and
quarterly average retail price series produced by Statistics New Zealand.
raised concerns about the risk of future workability issues that reform of the Act may
raising awareness of energy safety risks and legislative requirements;
rangatiratanga (sovereignty)
recommend changes that address the high degree of ambiguity that has made the Holidays Act difficult to understand and implement for employers
recommendation t o replace FBAPS payment methodologies. I nitial feedback suggests the new calculations are still comple x,
recommendation to replace the FBAPS payment methodology with
recommendation was to remove the need for judgement, reduce risks of gaming and ensure FBAPS paym ents reflect what an employee would have earned on a specific day.
recommendations provided in three attached papers.
recommending regulatory responses that balance life safety risks against the costs of regulation and impact on private property owners
reconcile with this proposal.
record an interview conducted in-person or via telephone;
recurring themes that may highlight systemic issues
reduce compliance costs for employers and we
reduce the impact of differences in regulatory settings across borders.
reduce unnecessary costs for businesses, especially small businesses
reduced existing pressure on tourism infrastructure, particularly in communities which lacked local funding capacity
reducing carbon emissions/improving environmental outcomes, that is:
refers to any commercial activity including advertising.
reform and modernise the innovation, technology and science system
regulating entities section
regulations will be passed to extend the transitional period for private vehicles in the first half of 2025 to 7 June 2026.
regulators that implement the law and support people to comply through engagement, enforcement, and standard setting
reinstating set meal and rest breaks
reinstating the ability for lower-paid workers to bring their families to New Zealand
relating to family violence leave, bereavement leave, alternative holidays, public holidays, and sick leave (known as FBAPS leave) :
release of an exposure draft of the Bill.
remove or disable all public letterboxes and deliver all postal items before they cease business
removes line of business restrictions for Chorus that do not add to prohibition on participation in retail, which remain in place.
removing unnecessary compliance and implementation costs.
renewable and efficient use of process heat
replace the Act because the proposed changes represent a fundamental change to the legislation
replace the Holidays Act 2003. It is an omnibus Bill (a Bill that amends more than one Act).
replacing existing skills bands with a simple remuneration threshold aligned to the median wage
report on progress against government goals
representatives from the Department of Conservation, Waka Kotahi and MBIE.
reproduce the material accurately
request corrections of that information.
requesting official information
require an original copy of a document to be provided to us;
require information to be provided by sworn statement or statutory declaration;
required by the 2020 Cabinet policy decisions , 18 months would be the minimum time required for changes to
requirements for safety management systems that operators of gas supply systems must meet. This includes setting the 'brightline' for which gas supply systems are required to have a safety management system
requirements for smoke alarms and insulation in residential rental properties
requires operators to be available (within reason) to respond to requests to remove a wheel clamp
requires operators to remove a wheel clamp as soon as reasonably practicable after a fee is paid
requires the Commerce Commission to undertake retail service quality monitoring
requires the employer to make a judgement about which calculation to use. The intent of the Taskforce ’s
requiring information disclosure from ticket resellers and primary ticket sellers
research areas using the Australian New Zealand Scientific Research Classifications (ANZSRC)
residential swimming pool barriers must be inspected every three years
resolve it themselves (self-resolution)
responsive and respectful
restoring protections for vulnerable workers, such as those in the cleaning and catering industries, regardless of the size of their employer
revenue received by production and post-production businesses from international sources increased 19%
review and inform offshore market development (including export and investment) strategies
reviewing and revising current guidance and resources for RBAs
reviewing the Building Code and producing documents that show how to comply with it
reviewing the occupational regulation of engineers
risk assessment, risk management and risk communication of public good food safety issues
robust analysis and implementation support for any changes, and
safely re-enter the Pike River mine drift
safety covers can be used as barriers for spa pools and hot tubs
safety critical roles, training and competencies
samples of the proposed postal identifier (see What Is a Postal Identifier below).
scientific researchers (academic, government and corporate).
secure, affordable and abundant electricity supply, and
securing appropriate travel and medical insurance cover for the duration of the internship
see reduced disparities in employment outcomes between different demographic groups and communities.
service, process and information inadequacies
set international labour standards
set out in the standards applicable to the regulations, with a focus on adopting international standards.
set the legislative framework and requirements for electricity and gas safety (energy safety) from supply through to end use.
sets a clear direction for New Zealand, providing a shared vision for where we want to get to, and what we need to do to get there
sets clear expectations for what the regime is intended to achieve
sets out how systems actors will work together to address the gaps, overlaps and uncertainties which inevitably arise in complex systems
sets the maximum fee that operators can charge at $100 (including GST)
sexual, racial or other harassment
shaping competitive, resilient and environmentally sustainable markets for the benefit of all New Zealanders.
sign up for and receive alerts
significantly increase the efficiency and utilisation of resources within the economy to reduce emissions.
simpler methodologies for calculating use of leave that do not require pay systems to access data about daily hours of work
simplify obligations, reduce compliance costs for employers, an d address areas that were previously incomplete . They also address
simplifying the payment method for other types of leave so that only one calculation is required.
someone keeps your passport and money from you
sometimes the government itself (eg, a company challenging a decision by a government agency).
stakeholder concerns relating to the former Bill. The recommendations of the reconvened JWG were provided to ministers in February 2018 and were used to develop
streamlines the process for recommending regulation of services in Schedule 3 of the Act
strengthening collective bargaining and union rights
strengthening enforcement of employment standards
strengthening the labour market test for lower-paid workers and removing it altogether for higher-paid jobs outside the main centres.
strengthening the regulatory leadership role of WorkSafe
strikes that end before the Bill comes into force, or
support exporters to grow their offshore markets, creating more jobs and opportunities.
supporting communities to manage tourism
supporting communities to manage tourism, and
supporting regulations, safe work instruments, standards, approved codes of practice, and guidance that sit under the HSW Act
supports a large, price sensitive, funded sector of up to 60,000 employees.
systems to load freshwater and unload wastewater
tackling environmental challenges
take account of cross-border impacts in the design and implementation of domestic law
take photographs during site visits or inspections; or
taking appropriate steps to respond to, and mitigate threats to the physical security of staff, or the security of information or places (e.g. a physical security breach, web-hacking).
taking photos of the Earth, Moon and Venus with the integrated camera.
tax and regulatory settings that support greater competition in key sectors (including banking, grocery and energy).
technologies to improve farm productivity, such as precision agriculture
telecommunications service obligations instruments.
telephone and video interpreting service
tell new customers, and remind existing customers at least once a year, that their home phone may not work in a power cut
tell recipients if a postal article will be, or has been opened, and why (unless this interferes with a law enforcement investigation)
tell their customers how they can protect themselves and where to go for further support
territorial authorities will have better tools to enforce pool barrier requirements, including notices to fix and infringement notices.
testing efficient battery charging in an orbital environment.
that a collective employment agreement exists and covers the work to be done by the employee,
that ensures a good mixture of sectors, different size d
that remove the exceptions to the AL
that the commencement clause provides that the consequential amendment to the PLEPA to replace the Holidays Act OWP
that the employee may join a union that is a party to the collective employment agreement,
that, if the employee joins the union, the collective employment agreement will bind the employee.
the Cabinet Fees Framework set out in Cabinet Circular CO (22)2, or
the Chair of NZCT Inc or their representative
the Direct Fibre Access Service should be adjusted
the Equal Pay Amendment Act
the FoodBowl located in Auckland
the FoodPilot located at Massey University near Palmerston North
the Innovation Programme for Tourism Recovery
the Mission Operations Control Centre, funded from the Strategic Science Investment Fund.
the Mobile Black Spot Fund (MBSF)
the Mobile Black Spot Fund (MBSF) is delivering improved mobile coverage on stretches of state highways and in tourism locations.
the Police or another government agency, if required or authorised by law (for example to assist with the investigation of a criminal offence), or to report significant misconduct or breach of duty or where there is a serious threat to health or safety.
the RBA training programme must be able to meet demand
the Radiocommunications Act 1989, including assigning licences, and compliance, enforcement, and registration.
the Regulatory Systems (Building and Housing) Amendment Act 2017, containing 44 amendments to two Acts
the Regulatory Systems (Commercial Matters) Amendment Act 2017, containing 140 amendments to 16 Acts
the Regulatory Systems (Economic Development) Amendment Act 2019, containing 130 amendments to 14 Acts
the Regulatory Systems (Housing) Amendment Act 2019, containing four amendments to two Acts.
the Regulatory Systems (Workforce) Amendment Act 2019, containing 18 amendments to three Acts
the Regulatory Systems (Workplace Relations) Amendment Act 2017, containing 8 amendments to two Acts.
the Resolution Institute (RI, formerly LEADR)
the Rural Broadband Initiative phases 1 and 2 (RBI1 and RBI2)
the Tourism Industry Transformation Plan
the Tourism Infrastructure Fund.
the Ultra-Fast Broadband (UFB) programme
the Ultra-Fast Broadband (UFB) programme and the Rural Broadband Initiative (RBI) are delivering vastly improved broadband services to urban and rural New Zealand
the University of Auckland
the ability to increase international visitor numbers quickly
the ability to increase regional dispersal of international visitors quickly
the availability provisions in the E mployment Relations Act 2000
the background to the review
the bargaining framework in the Employment Relations Act 2000, for employees and employers to assess a pay equity claim and agree on a settlement if a pay equity issue was identified.
the basic physics of the space environment
the business does not terminate the agreement for not accepting an additional task.
the cash value of board and lodgings.
the certification regime for gas appliances.
the company name appears in full on the stamp
the credibility and reliability of the source of the information, where it is not an official source;
the criteria and parameters to improve clarity an d certainty, but that the rules are still complex , with high compliance costs. Noted A gree Discuss
the date and time you visited this site
the deduction being made, or
the device you used to access this site
the employees have little bargaining power.
the ethical considerations of human exploration of space and kaitiakitanga of our near-Earth space environment
the extent to which the risks can be mitigated by licence or permit conditions; and
the future state of weather data availability in New Zealand
the general rules and requirements about safety
the impact of the collection on affected individuals;
the inclusion of state-owned enterprises, industry research cooperatives, levy bodies, and minority-owned subsidiaries of select Crown entities
the intended and possible outcome(s) of the information collection (for example, a prosecution or imposition of a fine or other statutory penalty).
the law will allow remedy reductions of up to 100 percent where an employee has contributed to the situation which gave rise to the personal grievance.
the official source of the information;
the opportunities and risks associated with the use of space, and
the other party to a concern, for the purpose of investigating and resolving the concern;
the outcomes of prosecution decisions (as reported annually by the Public Prosecutions Unit of the Crown Law Office) reflect MBIE prosecutions are well managed
the pages you accessed on this site and the links you clicked on
the placarding system was not always fit-for-purpose for flooding events
the potential for innovations from access to weather data that is not currently available.
the proposals in this paper which are intended to help reduce implementation requirements)
the proposed operation is in the national interest.
the referring site (if any) from which you clicked to reach this site
the register of telecommunications network operators
the remainder 647 kt was exported to be processed outside of New Zealand.
the remediation process it is currently undertaking . 5
the retail price series was adjusted, to account for price differences between Auckland and the rest of the country
the rules for how employee s ’ leave entitlements must be treated in restructuring situations (when a business is sold, transferred or work is contracted in or out ) were identified as lacking clarity and as an area where the current legal status quo may not provide
the search terms you used on this site
the sector employs around 14,000 people.
the severity of the harm we are seeking to prevent or address; and
the telecommunications functions of the Commerce Commission.
the type of web browser you used to access this site (eg, Internet Explorer, Google Chrome)
the underlying intent of existing provisions an d minimise s
the use of space for Earth observation.
the version of a manuscript that has been accepted for publication in a journal, incorporating all changes required by the peer-review process
the words appear as part of the postal operator's name on the stamp
the words are in the same typeface and point size as the company name.
the words form part of the postal operator's registered name
the worker is not required to be available to work certain times, days or for a minimum period OR the worker is able to sub-contract the work, and
the worker is not restricted from working for others, and
the worker is not restricted from working for others; and
them to make a submission .
there is a written agreement that specifies the worker is an independent contractor, and
there is a written agreement that specifies the worker is an independent contractor; and
they have earned. We propose rescinding this decision to remove the liability risk it would create for employers.
third party certification may not be the most effective way to achieve regime objectives.
this represented 5.6% of overall GDP from New Zealand economic production
those interpreters still working towards achieving their NAATI credential will be known as WTN interpreters until they achieve their credential. These interpreters can be used if no credentialed interpreter is available.
through the government contract
to 64 hours from 1 July 2020.
to address . There will be a trade - off regarding what we can address and the timing of delivering a Bill for introduction. We will
to apply the more complex payment methodologies that apply when AL is taken . W e recommend simplified criteria for using PAYG… 42.We recommend including a proposal in your May Cabinet paper that is simpler than the four-part test for using PAYG and less restrictive. 12 The Taskforce also recommended removing the ability to use PAYG for fixed - term employees on contracts of less than 12 months . Free and frank opinions Confidential advice to Government Confidential advice to Government 2324 - 2225 12 We are continuing to work on the details of the proposals 46.We will continue to work on the detail of the proposals above for inclusion in your Cabinet paper and w e will report back to you if we nee d any further decisions before then. This work will includ e engagement with representatives of Business NZ and the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions to help test for unintended consequences . 47.W e also intend to engage with the U nited Kingdom to learn from their experience in this area. The United Kingdom’s changes to their ‘Working time Regulations’ (that come into effect on 1 April 2024) include the introduction of ‘ rolled -up holiday pay’ (a similar concept to PAYG) as an option for ‘irregular hour ’ and ‘part-year’ workers. In its report back on the consultation on the reforms, the Department of Business and Trade states that it understands “rolled up holiday pay is already used in a lot of sectors due to the simplicity it offers to calculate holiday pay for irregular hours workers”. It also states that, while it recognises that ‘rolled up holiday pay’ may disincentivise taking time off work it considered that “existing safeguards are proportionate in addressing the concerns”. Within the weeks - based system , further opportunities for simplification and policy adjustments exist 48. The changes proposed above will simplify, improve workability and reduce compliance costs in some key area s . We are aware that there is still opportunity within a we ek s-based system for further technical improvements. We are also aware of some areas where stakeholders may raise concerns with the underlying policy intent and outcomes . An initial discussion of some of these is included. 49. W e have proposed that for the exposure draft, the rules for the periods of employment during which
to attract additional multi-day visitors
to attract more out-of-region visitors
to both internal and external stakeholders. This lets our stakeholders explore the data without setting up a database connection.
to enable full cost recovery.
to enable government ministers to interact with the chief executives of leading energy companies
to finalise the Bill for introduction in May 2025 ;
to help individual businesses make decisions about where to next.
to identify additional areas where guidance will be developed to assist applicants understand how they can meet the information requirements . 60. With respect to the exemptions for HAVs, the consultation document sought feedback on a minor exe mption for primary and secondary schools for educational purposes. Submitters raised the following concerns about the minor HAV exemption including: • It is unclear what the rationale is for excluding a particular class of HAV operator (primary and secondary schools) rather than an exemption based on the risk of the operator or particular characteristics of the HAV (such as payload size, weight or purpose)
to implement that business advice.
to meet forecast cost pressures.
to receive Language Assistance Services Newsletter updates or use the button below.
to report migrant exploitation
to simplify, reduce costs, and address gaps
to support businesses to re-start or scale up as tourism returns.
to support implementation.
to support its operation .
to take AL in advance above the pro - rata amount of leave in advance
to take ‘AL in advance on a pro - rata basis’ . This adds complexity to the framework. We are proposing a weeks - based accrual system for AL ,
to the detailed recommendations set out in the attached papers
total expenditure on production was $1 billion, up 32%
tougher sanctions for employers and officers responsible for breaches of employment standards
trade marks, service marks and commercial names and designations.
training opportunities for rangatahi (youth);
transfer data to MBIE for use in the Tourism Evidence and Insights Centre (TEIC) (that is, the data must not be owned by the applicant). This will require consultation with MBIE over the design/development of quality data, and how it can be integrated into the
transforming the foundations of the tourism system
transparent and accountable
types of dispute resolution (sitting along the spectrum of formality and empowerment),
unaccompanied and separated migrant children living in New Zealand.
unbundled fibre services should be price-capped
under a contract for services with a postal operator.
understand the benefits of investing in training
understand the skills they will need in the future
undertaking joint industry-government action to raise awareness of the issues and make commitments to improve the ticketing system.
update regulatory settings to enable more timely decision making, free up innovators to test their technology and ideas, and support businesses to demonstrate the integrity of their products so they can access export markets, and
upload and download of data from spacecraft.
use a process provided by government (eg, a government mediation service, tribunal or ombudsman)
use a process provided by the private sector (eg, an industry body).
use recognised and validated measurement approaches able to be aggregated/compared with other similar data
use specialist equipment (for example to monitor interference with the radio spectrum).
use the services of New Zealand businesses (that is, industry bodies must commission suitably qualified professionals)
using illegal drugs at work
v. minimise compliance costs for employers
various working arrangements , payroll providers
vi. minimise perverse incentives on employers and employees
viii. be readily applicable to the full range of working and remuneration arrangements in the labour market both now and in the future
vocational and disability support worker.
want to withdraw your application after it has been submitted
was launched in May 2019 and aims to enrich New Zealand through sustainable tourism growth, underpinned by productive, sustainable and inclusive tourism.
we forecast the discount for the quarter, then
we have developed our Regulatory Systems Stewardship Strategy 2023-2028. This sets a 5-year strategic direction to strengthen regulatory stewardship capability at MBIE.
we share an exposure draft of the Bill and consultation document wit h
website explains how you can meet the current building legislation and regulatory requirements.
wellbeing support and time off for RBAs following an event needs greater consideration.
were later widened and Simon Mount QC was appointed to assist Mr Martin with the inquiry. The inquiry considered (amongst other things) the circumstances of, and reasons for, any engagement by Crown Agencies of external security consultants, including but not limited to Thompson and Clark Investigations Limited.
whanaungatanga (a sense of family and belonging, relationships built on shared experiences and working together).
whanaungatanga (connection)
what personal characteristics and early experiences in New Zealand are associated with successful labour market integration in the long term.
what rules and procedures should apply to accident compensation appeals.
what settlement outcomes have Pacific migrants experienced in New Zealand
what types of Pacific migrants have had more desirable settlement outcomes
when restructuring takes place .
whether system objectives, policy or context have changed over time
whether the charter document should be updated to reflect these changes
whether, as a result of system assessments, progress has been made in addressing identified risks and closing gaps.
which is about MBIE's work related to the laws on how entities (including companies, incorporated societies, building societies and limited partnerships) are created, administered and wound up.
which is the largest single payroll in the country . 6
which would simplify the end - to - end process for providing AL entitlement and better support common practice. We also propose adjustments to other parts of the system to
who should be the decision-makers for accident compensation appeals - District Court Judges or Tribunal Members
wholesale prices for faster broadband comparable to urban pricing
will deliver economic impact for visitors in the host region
will open prior to these dates.
with an accrual - based framework
with business and worker representatives
workability. In subsequent discussions on your Workplace Relations and Safety work policy programme, you signalled your comfort wi th option b) above, and the
working in partnership with others.
would be comprised of four parts:
would be those associated with the compliance of seeking a licence. However, the “no exemptions” option would pose a disproportionate compliance cost on low risk HAV operators which would not be consistent with the policy intent. Preferred o ption – exemption s for certain low risk HAV activities 51. In order to allow for low risk HAV operations to continue without the need for a HAV licence, the preferred option is to prescribe that the following things are not a high -altitude vehicle or a high- altitude payload for the purposes of the OSHAA Act : • balloons launched with only the following sondes : radiosondes, ozone sondes, frost point sondes, and /or backscatter sondes , and the payload is used for the sole purpose of measuring any combination of the following atmospheric profiles : pressure, temperature, humidity, wind sp eed and direction, ozone concentration, water vapour and aerosols (including dust, smoke and volcanic ash) • balloons launched for the purposes of education by a New Zealand primary or secondary school or a New Zealand tertiary institute for the purposes of education where the payload carried by the balloon can only be used to describe or illustrate the progress of the vehicle and the payload device is an unmodified commercial off- the-shelf product, and
would impose a statutory constraint on the contractual arrangements businesses negotiate
would increase complexity in some cases (where the current methodology is very simple) and ,
written employment agreements that are followed
www.ombudsman.parliament.nz
www.quantiumsolutions.com
you are paid too little money or none at all
you are subject to fines from your employer for doing something wrong
you have been sexually harassed by your employer
you have no time off for medical appointments, to go shopping or meet friends
you have to pay your wages back to your employer
you must ask permission to eat, sleep, or go to the toilet
your employer bullies or threatens you
your employer forces you to work to pay off a debt
your operating system (eg, Windows 10, Mac OS X)
© Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0
© Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0 8shrvakdix 2020 -06-03 14:04:00 In Confidence
© Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0 I N C O N F I D E N C E DEV-20-MIN-0035 Cabinet Economic Development Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act 1982, by persons with the appropriate authority. Government Response to the Report of the Holidays Act Taskforce Portfolio Workplace Relations and Safety On 11 March 2020, the Cabinet Economic Development Committee (DEV): Holidays Act Taskforce 1 noted that on 23 May 2018, DEV agreed to establish a Taskforce to review the Holidays Act 2003 and suggest recommendations for change [DEV-18-MIN-0098]; 2 noted that the Holidays Act Taskforce submitted its report to the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety in October 2019 and has proposed an improved status quo, which retains the existing units of entitlement (weeks for annual holidays, days for other types of leave) and focuses on addressing known issues with the Act by providing greater certainty; 3 agreed to endorse in full the Holidays Act Taskforce’s recommendations, as set out in pages 28 to 47 of the Taskforce’s report (attached as Annex Two to the paper under DEV-20-SUB-0035), as the basis for a substantially amended Holidays Act (noting also the summary of recommendations and the proposed government response at Annex One); 4 agreed to refine the Holidays Act Taskforce’s recommendations on two issues where the recommendations were incomplete, by specifying that: 4.1 the reference period for the ‘short-run’ average weekly earnings calculation used for calculating annual holiday payments be 13 weeks; 4.2 any commission or incentive payments where it is unclear over what period of time the payments were ‘earned’ only be included in the 52 week average payment calculation; 5 noted that some of the Holidays Act Taskforce’s recommendations are likely to receive negative feedback, but that this risk can be partly mitigated by a communications strategy that focuses on the improvements that the Taskforce’s recommendations will provide; Legislative implications 6 noted that a category 5 priority on the 2020 Legislation Programme is being sought for a Holidays Amendment Bill (drafting instructions to be issued to the Parliamentary Counsel Office in 2020); 7 invited the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety to issue drafting instructions to Parliamentary Counsel Office to give effect to the above policy proposals; 1 I N C O N F I D E N C E 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:07:35 I N C O N F I D E N C E DEV-20-MIN-0035 8 authorised the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety to make decisions, consistent with the Holidays Act Taskforce’s recommendations, on any issues that arise during the detailed policy design and drafting process; 9 noted that the authorisation sought under paragraph 8 above includes the authority to make decisions on updated compliance and enforcement mechanisms to support the new Holidays Act regime (such as the functions and powers of labour inspectors), provided these do not deviate significantly from mechanisms in current employment legislation; 10 noted that the Holidays Act 2003 binds the Crown as will any amendments to that Act; Publicity and next steps 11 noted that the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety intends to publicly release the Holidays Act Taskforce Report (Annex 2), alongside a statement signalling the government’s decision to adopt the Taskforce’s recommendations in full; 12 directed the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, in consultation with the Government Chief Digital Officer and relevant stakeholders as appropriate, to develop a transition plan and report back to Cabinet by the end of 2020. Janine Harvey Committee Secretary Present: Officials present from: Rt Hon Winston Peters Hon Phil Twyford Hon Dr Megan Woods (Chair) Hon Chris Hipkins Hon David Parker Hon Nanaia Mahuta Hon Iain Lees-Galloway Hon Damien O’Connor Hon Willie Jackson Hon James Shaw Hon Eugenie Sage Office of the Prime Minister Officials Committee for DEV Hard-copy distribution: Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety 2 I N C O N F I D E N C E 8shrvakdix 2020-06-03 14:07:35
© Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0)
© Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0)                                                                                                  ! "      "" "       !" #$ #%#   #  &#'("  )         *'+#                !      "!  #  $ % &   %   !    '     ' !    '  ! !        !        "!  #  () # *+,-../0.123       !  !  '   !  '  "!  # 4 %'      '      ! ! #   !   ' $ % 5    !6'    ! '      !    !  % ' !         !  ! '   +,-../0.(72)  !   *3   '  (   ' $ % 5    !6'  !  !    !      !   !   !!    !          '' )*   ! 8 %  ! '      )9        *:  8 %    !  ;  (3 (  !   '   !  !  ! !  !              !        <   8 ! =   '         !     ' !    ! 3 %+ , +(      '8    !!!      !   )   ! # ! 48 4 !>     !  . .6?:.*8 ! '    ! !    8   !     8 <    !   ! !         !     6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:11:3 9      ! -.!/0.!(( ,120     !  !               ! ' 8 % @   )#9* '   @       3! !   !   8 % . !      8   '        3   !A           #          @   % #9   @   =      % #9!    '  <   #9'        8 8 % . !     3 (    !         8     %  #9 !    !  B .        @ !      ! 8  !3       !  !      !  ' !        8 !  8 % !  !  '   )#9 !     *  !B ! ! @  3! !    !  '          !   '8 %   !     !   (8 % 3 7   !     !    ! =    '   8      !  '8 %!8 %!!               !    !    '     3 C   !  !    !  ' .   '    #9    '    @   ) . .  . * !  =        8    (8 % 3 D     ' $ % 5   ! 6'    % !    ! '    '    . .  .  !    8  '8     D   ! A      '   . .  .   !  =     'A !   3 D !  !    !  !   '   8   !      3 %#-( .!(( ,1%#0     !  !    =      ' 8      '      3! !   !    ! !     3 1     !      ' ' %     %         %  ' '  !       !   3    6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:11:3 9      !   %#! .!(( , #0     '    !   $ %    )$*     9        # 1D )9#*8  ! '         !8   !  /!5      '    !    '$3     !  !       !  ' '       !      8   '  '              ! ! 3! !  '      ' !6 !  #'     5   #  5#*   =  8  =       ' '      '      ' !3 ( '         !   8 ' <       !       !      '      8      '    8     !  !  # 3  #%#(   7   "!  )/   6%9  *# !  #    !    %        ' '   !  !   % !     !     '  '  =       !  !    %        ! '8 % 3 C   .    '   !   .!  %                    8    @  %        !  =  '8 %   '  8 %3 D      '$ % 5   !6'   % !     !  ' .    3 ((#     '  !      ':  /  !    ):/*8 !  ! !    !    %  !  :/ !  8 %!   .   !          8  % ! 8 %  3 1          !     !       9#! -      # 1D(      <    #9    !              5#    '   8 '  !  :   5   3           !   =    !     9#    "!  # $    '  '    '  '   );  *'8  ! 8   :   5   !              !  '  ! 3         ' :   !  ' : 8    '   '  !  :   5   3 (   6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:11:3 9      ,( # #      ' $ % 5   !6'   !    %    #      '    !   3     < ! ' ' :  6    '  !    3 (  %  ,       '    3  # + +  (     ' $ % 5   ! 6'     ! '             !      ' < ! ' 6     3 7     ' $ % 5   ! 6'    % ' !      !       8   !    ! <    !   8     3 C   A    % ' !      (  ! <  '  '          ' $ %  5   ! 6'       ' ! '             7  ' : '  !      73 D  : 8 !   8  % "!  # ( 8       ' #  !>   ! ' !  )* ' , '  # 11 5  %   6     # $   (#  #$ ", !6   "  : )  * ": %  - !  "6  ;  "6 : 8 " &!   "4!!  "4 % "  6!  "#! 8:   "#! 8"  ! " %  6 '' '    '' '"#! 8:     ':  /  !   ''  ' 
© Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) BRIEFING Holidays Act Review: background, progress and next steps Date: 21 December 2023 Priority: Medium Security classification: In Confidence Tracking number: 2324 - 0982 Action sough t Action sought Deadline Hon Brooke van Velden Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety Agree to meet with officials to discuss options for how to proceed with the Holidays Act Review. 26 January 2024 Contact for telephone discussion (if required) Name Position Telephone 1st contact Alison Marris Manager, Employment Standards Policy 04 901 8564  Anna Spencer Principal Advisor , Employment Standards Policy 04 9013909 The fo llowing departments/agencies have been consulted N/A Minister’s office to complete: Approved Declined Noted Needs change Seen Overtaken by Events See Minister’s Notes Withdr awn Comment s Privacy of natural persons
© Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) I N C O N F I D E N C E 1 I N C O N F I D E N C E In Confidence
© Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) I N C O N F I D E N C E ECO-24-MIN-0177 Cabinet Economic Policy Committee Minute of Decision This document contains information for the New Zealand Cabinet. It must be treated in confidence and handled in accordance with any security classification, or other endorsement. The information can only be released, including under the Official Information Act 1982, by persons with the appropriate authority. Holidays Act Reform: Approval to Consult Portfolio Workplace Relations and Safety On 28 August 2024, the Cabinet Economic Policy Committee (ECO): 1 noted that in May 2024, ECO: 1.1 agreed amendments to existing Cabinet decisions and made further policy decisions on reforming the Holidays Act 2003; 1.2 noted the intent of the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety (the Minister) to: 1.2.1 release an exposure draft of the Employment Leave Bill (the Bill) for targeted consultation to test a range of policy options with those who will be affected by the reform; 1.2.2 report back to Cabinet in August 2024 seeking agreement to the content of the consultation document; [ECO-24-MIN-0081] 2 noted that, in addition to amending existing Cabinet decisions, ECO agreed that the Bill should include a pro-rata approach for providing the minimum 10-day sick leave entitlement and that, as authorised by Cabinet, the Minister has made decisions on the detail of the approach that will be included in the consultation document; 3 noted that the purpose of the consultation document, attached under ECO-24-SUB-0177, is to seek feedback on the technical and policy details of the proposals in the Bill and on alternative policy options; 4 noted that if, following consultation, Cabinet agrees to further work on key areas of the Bill, then additional time for further policy development and legislative drafting will be required, and that the timing of introduction would depend on the number and significance of the changes and whether further testing is required; 5
© Crown Copyright, Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) I N C O N F I D E N C E In Confidence Office of the Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety Cabinet Economic Policy Committee HOLIDAYS ACT REFORM: CONSULTATION DOCUMENT FOR TARGETED CONSULTATION Proposal 1This paper seeks agreement to the content of the attached consultation document that will accompany an exposure draft of the Employment Leave Bill (the Bill). These documents will be released for targeted consultation in September 2024. The purpose of the consultation is to seek feedback on opportunities to improve the simplicity and workability of the Bill, and on alternative options that go beyond the Bill. Relation to government priorities 2The Coalition Government’s Action Plan for the period 1 July – 30 September 2024 includes beginning consultation on the reform of the Holidays Act 2003 (the Act). Executive Summary 3Work has been underway for some time to find enduring, workable solutions to longstanding and widespread issues with the Act. On 27 May 2024, Cabinet noted my intent to release an exposure draft of the Bill for targeted consultation this year, to demonstrate this Government’s commitment to reforming the Act. 4I am seeking agreement to the content of the attached consultation document (Appendix One) for release alongside the Bill in September 2024. The purpose of the targeted consultation is to seek feedback from the various stakeholders who are impacted by the legislation, including those who work with it on the ground, to ensure the final Bill is robust and will resolve the longstanding issues. Consultation will include 100 participants who represent payroll, employer and employee perspectives, to provide technical feedback on the workability of changes to the Act. 5The Bill largely reflects decisions made by the previous Government, along with improvements agreed by Cabinet in May 2024 to increase simplicity, reduce compliance costs and improve workability, and a new proposal to pro-rate sick leave entitlement. Consulting on the Bill will provide an opportunity to consider whether more substantial shifts from the previous Government’s decisions are needed and whether any areas of work merit extending the timeframes for delivering new legislation. 6The consultation document sets out issues with the Act, explains the changes proposed in the Bill, and explores alternative options. Key issues are highlighted upfront to help direct participants to issues that matter most to them. Targeted and open questions are asked throughout the document to elicit specific technical feedback, views on the Bill, and to invite alternative solutions. 7At the end of the consultation document, participants will be asked to identify the issues that matter most to them and explain why. This information will inform I N C O N F I D E N C E 1 3u22ohzj22 2024-09-25 17:37:38 I N C O N F I D E N C E decisions on next steps, including consideration of areas that require further policy development and to balance these against the time required to deliver a Bill for introduction. 8 After consultation, I intend to report back to Cabinet in December 2024 following analysis of stakeholder feedback on the Bill, and I may seek further policy decisions at this time. Depending on the nature of feedback and the extent of changes proposed, I intend that a Bill will be introduced in May 2025. Background 9 Issues with the Act have been a longstanding concern for employers, employees, and payroll providers. There is widespread agreement that the Act is not fit-for- purpose but there is ongoing debate over what a replacement Act should look like, and how interests should be balanced. 10 On 27 May 2024, Cabinet noted my intent to release an exposure draft of a Bill that would replace the Act (named the Employment Leave Bill) for targeted consultation with a representative sample of stakeholders (discussed in paragraphs 24-28 below) in September 2024. It also noted my intent to seek Cabinet agreement in August 2024 to the content of a consultation document that will accompany the Bill [CAB-24- MIN-0181]. 11 The exposure draft of the Bill released for targeted consultation will largely represent policy decisions made by the previous Government.1 It will also include improvements agreed by Cabinet in May 2024 intended to simplify, improve workability, and reduce costs and complexity, and increase certainty . 12 Some of the key changes Cabinet agreed include: 12.1 shifting to a weeks-based accrual system for annual leave, 12.2 simplifying the process for calculating annual leave entitlement and the framework for using pay-as-you-go for annual leave,2 and 12.3 consolidating the payment method for other leave types so that only one calculation is required. 13 Cabinet also agreed that the Bill should include a pro-rata approach for providing the minimum 10-day sick leave entitlement so that there is some proportionality between an employee's sick leave entitlement and the quantum of work they perform per week. 1 Based on the Holidays Act Taskforce recommendations [CAB-20-MIN-0100] which it had established in 2018 [CAB-18-MIN- 0250]. 2 Under the authority delegated to by Cabinet I have made decisions on the detail of the provisions for using pay-as-you-go (PAYG) (paying annual leave as a regular part of an employee’s pay) that will be included in the Bill. My decisions include the following objective criteria for using PAYG that do not require the application of judgement: i. The employee does not have agreed hours of work in their employment agreement AND ii. The employee works for an average of 12 hours or less per seven-day period AND iii. The employee has at least two, separate, continuous periods of seven days or more during which work is not performed in every six months. In order to reduce the administrative burden and compliance costs of the process for reviewing PAYG during employment, I have also agreed to extend the review period from 13 weeks to six months. I N C O N F I D E N C E 2 3u22ohzj22 2024-09-25 17:37:38 I N C O N F I D E N C E 14 Under the authority delegated to me by Cabinet, I have made decisions on the detail of the pro-rata approach that will be included in the Bill. The approach retains a five day ‘floor’ for all employees who are eligible for sick leave and an entitlement scale that provides four tiers of entitlement based on the average number of days employees work per week: five days (for employees who work one-two days per week), seven days (for employees who work three days per week), eight days (for employees who work four days per week), and 10 days (for employees who work five or more days per week). This decision maintains alignment with design features elsewhere in the Bill, however the consultation document will seek feedback on alternative options. 15 The purpose of consulting on the exposure draft of the Bill is twofold. First, we want to seek technical feedback on how workable the proposed changes are for all stakeholders and understand potential impacts and additional ongoing costs associated with implementation. Second, we want to hear what further changes we could make that would achieve greater simplicity and make it easier for businesses to comply and for workers to be paid their correct entitlements. The targeted consultation will help us understand what really matters to those who work with, or are impacted by, the Act. 16 This Bill is a step on the way to new legislation, but it is by no means a finished product. I know there are further opportunities to improve the simplicity and workability of the legislation, including consideration of alternatives that go beyond what is in the Bill. We need to know if the Bill is on the right track, or if a fundamentally different approach is needed. I seek agreement to the content of the consultation document that will support targeted consultation 17 The consultation document attached (Appendix One) serves as a guide for participants as they navigate the proposed policy changes set out in the Bill and explore alternative options. It explains each policy change and the issues with the Act they are intended to address, and offers alternative policy options for consideration. Questions are included throughout the consultation document seeking feedback from participating stakeholders about both the proposed changes and alternative options. 18 The introduction of the consultation document includes clear messaging that the Bill is not final policy and that more significant changes are possible, both within the current framework and beyond. I want to know which options strike the right balance between the objectives (described in paragraph 21 below) and what benefits, risks and trade-offs need to be considered. Appendix Two provides a list of the key proposals in the Bill and the alternative options stakeholder views are sought on. 19 Some examples of alternative options that fit within the current framework include: 19.1 replacing the three annual leave payment calculations in the Bill with a single calculation, 19.2 increasing or reducing flexibility to use pay-as-you-go (PAYG) for annual leave, and 19.3 different options for pro-rating sick leave. 20 The consultation document also includes some alternative options that sit outside the current framework. These include: I N C O N F I D E N C E 3 3u22ohzj22 2024-09-25 17:37:38 I N C O N F I D E N C E 20.1 Shifting to an hours-based accrual system for annual leave (and/or sick leave): This could provide a simpler method of providing leave entitlements and more certainty and clarity for employers and employees. There would be trade-offs between objectives to consider however, and a number of design decisions to be made. It would also require changes to the end-to-end annual leave system. 20.2 Adjusting rules for when calculations of averages are made so that they can be calculated at a fixed point in time, rather than each time leave is taken:
×× Despite financial liability being transferred from the outgoing employer, recognising annual and alternative holiday balances is a resourcing liability. This may be a disincentive for an incoming employer to offer existing employees the choice to transfer employment.
ȓ be relevant to the organisation; ȓ clearly allocate accountability for achieving public safety outcomes; and
‘Casual’ employee: Employment legislation does not define what ‘casual’ employee means (it is set out in case law). It is generally taken to mean an employee who works only as and when required, who can turn down work and who has no expectation of ongoing employment (Section 28 of the Act ).
‘greater of’ OLP and ADP payment methodology for other leave
“New Zealand is going in a very good direction. These issues with HAVs are not well addressed by other countries and New Zealand is relatively well -placed compared to other countries on the HAV side” – Dawn Aerospace “Rocket Lab supports the purpose of the Act and acknowledges to date the Act has supported our success and, as a result, the success of our many suppliers and highly skilled employees across New Zealand. It is clear to Rocket Lab that the New Zealand Space Agency and the responsible Minister apply great diligence in reviewing our and our customers’ launch and payload permit applications, ensuring that the activities continue to meet New Zealand’s obligations in the Outer Space Treaty, other international obligations, and are in New Zealand’s nat ional interests” – Rocket Lab 53. Submitters made a number of proposals for improving the regime, and these are addressed in the report. The issues have been divided into two broad categories : ‘substantive matters’ and ‘other issues.’ 54. In the substantive iss ues section of the report we discuss the key issues that have been identified in relation to the licen sing and permitting functions under the Act . This has includ ed several issues relating to the regulation of high -altitude vehicles , where technological advances since the legislation was developed may require legislative change s. In the ‘ Other issues’ section of the report, we discuss a number of other issues raised in submissions, and identified by MBIE, including some areas where some legislative ‘tidying up’ may be desirable .
“The space sector moves rapidly, and there’s a need to keep up and stay relevant. In this regard, the OSHAA as a legislat ive framework is fantastic! New Zealand’s legislative regime/the OSHAA is a major reason why we chose to locate here. The implementation of the regime and the speed at which the NZ Space Agency reacts/responds made New Zealand an attractive location option ” – LeoLabs
• A description of the ground stations the payload will be communicating with for commanding the payload or for the transfer of data colle cted by the payload.
• An employer must not unreasonably withhold consent to an employee’s request to take AL entitlement that has arisen. • An employer may also agree to leave in advance of entitlement arising. • An employer must allow an employee to take AL within 12 months afte r the date on which the employee’s entitlement arises and must allow the employee to take at least two weeks of their AL entitlement in a continuous period. • Employers can require employees to take AL they have become entitled to if: o they cannot reach agreement with their employee about when AL will be taken ; or o they have a closedown period ; and they give the employee at least 14 days ’ notice . I consider the current balance of interests between employers and employees is appropriate and I therefore propose adjustments that seek to maintain the underlying intent of the existing provisions while minimising complexity: • An employer must not unreasonab ly withhold consent to an employee’s request to take accrued AL entitlement (this reflects the 2020 Cabinet policy decision on pro -rata leave in advance) . • An employer may also agree to leave in advance of accrued entitlement (status quo) . • Following the emp loyee’s first 12 -month employment anniversary date: o Within each 12 -month period an employer must not withhold consent to an employee taking four weeks of accrued AL entitlement (if an employee has it available) ; and o cannot withhold consent to an employee t aking at least two weeks of their accrued AL entitlement in a continuous period. • If an employee’s AL entitlement balance is greater than four weeks an employer can require employees to take AL entitlement in excess of four weeks but only if: o they have sought to confer with the employee and genuinely tried to reach agreement about when the AL is to be taken but have been unable to ; or o they have an established annual closedown period ; and they give the employee at least 14 days’ notice of the requirement to take AL entitlement. Provisions in the Act for exchanging AL entitlement for payment (‘cashing -up’) A weeks -based accrual system will require a consequential amendment to the period of ‘12 months of continuous employment ’ (beginning on the date on which the employee most recently became entitled to AL) specified in the Act as the timeframe within which an employee can cash up one week of AL entitlement. To maintain the policy intent that only one week of AL can be cashed up per year (regardless of whether AL has been cashed up in previous years ), I propose an adjustment so that: • after the completion of the first 12 months of e mployment an employee may request t o exchange up to one week of accrued AL entitlement for payment in each subsequent 12 -month period. 6kjtrvweh7 2024-06-04 11:12:15 I N C O N F I D E N C E 16 I N C O N F I D E N C E Ability to take AL in advance during a closedown period In 2020 Cabinet agreed that , during a closedown period, an employer must allow an employee to take AL in advance above the pro-rata amount of leave in advance they have earned.
• An overview of any protective security (including cybersecurity) measur es or policies in place to protect the raw remote sensing data and systems commanding the payload or remote sensing system
• Applicants mu st be fit to hold a license 7. Despite being satisfied that the statutory tests are met, the Minister may decline to grant a licence or permit for the activity if he/she is not satisfied that the activity is in the national interest . The Minister must decline to grant a licence or permit if the Prime Minister issues a certificate that the proposed activity poses a significant risk to national security. 8. In order to implement the OSHAA Act , regulations are required: • to set out the requirements for licences and permits, most significantly the information requirements • to prescribe requirements for orbital debris mitigation plans • to prescribe requirements for safety cases • to prescribe the circumstances in which certain vehicles that go into high altitude are not h igh-altitude vehicles ( and hence will not require a licence ), and • to prescribe the form of notices for infringement offences. Current market dynamics and expected activity 9. The development of a New Zealand -based space launch industry creates opportunities for New Zealand to provide launch services to meet a growing demand for launches, particularly for small satellites and constellations of small satellites. It also creates opportunities for New Zealand - based organisations to design, build and operate thei r own satellites, and to develop applications for space -based information . 10. At th e current time, Rocket Lab is only launch provider operating in New Zealand that will require a launch and launch facility license under the OSHAA Act. Given the lead time n ecessary to establish a space launch operation, it is unlikely that this position will change in the near future. 11. For payload permits, we anticipate that Rocket Lab will increase its customer base over the first 1 -2 years, meaning there will be a fairly consistent flow of payload permit applications. If other launch providers enter the New Zealand market, this flow will increase 12. For HAV licenses, we are aware of three main current users of HAVs (NIWA, the MetService and NASA). We are also aware of some re search and educational launches of high -altitude balloons (either by universities, or primary and secondary schools). We expect this sort of activity to increase as technology becomes more accessible and affordable . 13. We are also aware of groups that are involved in educational and recreational rocketry. These activities would not currently fall within the scope of the OSHAA Act because they do not operate above controlled airspace. However, we understand that the New Zealand Rocketry Association has members that are seeking to operate above controlled airspace in the future (although these launches will not be able to reach orbit). The legislation establishes a proportionate and risk -based approach to licenses 14. The OSHAA Act establishes a licensing and permitting regime to enable New Zealand to authorise and have ongoing supervision of space activities conducted from New Zealand. 15. The design of the regime has been informed by international space law and practice, and by the experiences of other like- minded co untries – a number of which are in the process of reviewing their own space laws. 7
• Build ing in flexibility in terms of the information that can be provided e.g. being able to provide a range of dates for launches, flight paths and launch locations (We note that s ome of the information requirements can be set as conditions on a licence to be confirmed closer to the proposed launch )
• Ensure that licensing is not required where this would be disproportionate to the level of ris k involved , and • Reduce license compliance costs for low risk activity as far as possible . 3 Options and impact analysis
• Evidence of safety practices in relation to the (non -aircraft) HAV activities, including (if applicable): o A description of the approach t aken to the safety assessment o A description of the HAV and its proposed operation including a description of all of the safety critical systems o Particulars of all relevant New Zealand and international standards that have been applied or will be applied in relation to the HAV o A description of the safety management system the applicant has in place to: a) identify and assess the safety risks associated with the proposed HAV activities and b) develop and implement safety control measures o Details of the key p ersonnel responsible for the safety of the HAV activit ies o A description of the geographical areas likely to be affected by the proposed HAV activities and if relevant demographic information about the local community that may be affected by it o A descripti on of the significant risks associated with the proposed HAV activit ies o A description of the control measures in place to mitigate those risks o An emergency management plan that describes the systems, process and procedures that will apply in the event of a major incident
• Evidence of technical capability and safety including name of key persons relied up on for their technical capability and evidence of qualifications, and the steps the applicant has and will take to manage risks to public safety, and plan for managing orbital debris. (This information is principally required to assess safety) • Information about previous convictions or offences, and history of mental illness. (This information is principally required to assess fitness to hold a licence) , and • Information about any foreign licences, permits or authorisations for the same or substantially similar activity applied for, granted or declined. (This information is to enable an assessment of whether the licence can be treated as meeting some or all of the requirements of the Act including matters such as safety, technical capability and management of orbital debris.) 47. This list was developed base d on best practice from international regimes as above, including extensive discussions with United States regulators , in consultation with a number of government agencies to ensure the information required meets the New Zealand government’s needs for risk assessment . The list of information requirements are supported by: • Guidance published on the ministry’s website that details what specific requirements entail (for example, the elements we would expect to see included in an orbital debris mitigation plan) , and • An iterative process for applications where additional information is gathered through s.51 of the OSHAA Act (which reduce s the amount of information that has to be provided at the outset where the mini mum information requirements are adequate .) 48. Setting minimum requirements in regulations is appropriate in order to keep compliance costs down for the majority of applicants for whom this information will be sufficient to enable the regulator to undertake t he assessments. This also forms part of the competitive advantage New Zealand has as a launch State for overseas companies wishing to launch payloads from New Zealand. Impacts of the preferred option Assessment against objectives Enable efficient applic ation process Ensuring compliance costs of applying are not overly onerous Enable the application process to evolve over time Option one : Prescribe detailed information requirements A prescriptive regime is likely to be inefficient and time consuming for applicants , as the information requirements would be set at the same level for all applicants, regardless of the level of complexity of their space Relative c ompliance costs from a prescriptive approach may be comparable or higher than competitor regimes instead offering a competitive alternative. In addition, l ow risk and/or amateur space activities would be unfairly penalised by a prescriptive regime This would act as a deterrent to companies due to high costs relative to their activities, or Locking in too much detail through regulations during the early stages of establishing a competitive space industry in New Zealand will make it more difficult for New Zealand to apply a flexible and nimble approach to the licencing regime, the cornerstone of New Zealand’s competitive advantage
• If the HAV is not an aircraft , then for key persons relied upon for their technical capability in conducting a safe HAV launch : o The person’s name o The relationship of the person to the applicant (e.g. employee, contractor of HAV activities ) o Evidence of qualifications and experience to u ndertake the activity o any other information the person considers relevant to the assessment of technical capability
• If the applicant or person who is to have or likely to have control over the exercise of rights under the licence holds an aviation document under the Civil Aviation Act the details in this document may satisfy this information requirement • Otherwise , whether the applicant or a person who is to have or is likely to have control over the exercise of the rights under the licence: o has been charged with or convicted of any offence in New Zealand or any other jurisdiction, or o has had an aviation document under the Civil Aviation Act or regulations made under the Civil Aviation Act suspended or revoked (other than a revocation at the request of the applicant), or had condition s imposed on an aviation document, or o has received notice from the C ivil Aviation Authority of a proposed adverse decision, or o has ever had a licence, permit or authorisation for the same or substantially similar activity by a foreign regulatory body susp ended, denied or revoked and the reason s given
• If the management, oversight or control of the HAV payload or its operation (including the ground segment) is being sub -contracted, provide: o Name o Address o Place of organisation or incorporation o Description of the services being sub -contracted.
• OSHAA Section 53(1)(b) states that ‘if the licensee or permit holder is a body corporate, they must not undergo a change of control without prior approval of the Minister.’ The issue is whether this provision is workable in the context of large corporations that have interests in multiple jurisdictions. • When considering a change of control application there are not defined criteria/prescribed requirements the Minister must/may take into account when determining “that the licensee or permit holder following the change of control is likely to be able to comply with the conditions, and give proper effect, to the licence or permit” Space, Policy and Regulatory Team (MBIE) The change of control provision was tested when SpaceX purchased an interest in Swarm. The New Zealand transact ion was the last of a long line of transactions involving a number of other jurisdictions involving SpaceX obtaining control of Swarm and which would proceed irrespective of the Minister’s consent. While in the event, the Minister’s consent was obtained be fore the transaction took place, it is worth exploring with PCO, whether and how the transaction can be made more workable. On the second issue, the review team considers that in assessing whether or not t he change of control should be granted, the Minist er will need to consider whether the threshold tests for a permit would continue to satisfy in the event of a change of control. The issue is whether this needs to be spelt out more clearly on the face of the statute.
• Provid ing clarity around de finitions of key terms and which types of licence will be required for which kinds of activity
• Provid ing clarity around how an organisation demonstrates it has the technical capability, especially for those organisations building new capability, and how technical capability is assessed • The need for good quality guidance to assist applicants to understand the information requirements and how they can meet them. 58. The feedback on HAV exemptions is incorporated into the HAV exemptions section of this this Re gulatory Impact Statement (paras 50 - 54). 59. The analysis of the submissions resulted in a number of modifications to the application information requirements , including to reduce the amount of information obtained up front by asking for a summary of information in the first instance rather than prescribing in detail what information is to be provided (e.g. communications capability) and to provid ing greater flexibility in relation to supplying information that may not be known at the time of application . It also enabled us 17
• Summary of who the enhanced and “unenhanced/raw” remote sensing data is to be provided to, including: o customers or classes of customers who will have access to the data, o whether any unenhanced data will be provided to any customers or classes of customers o plans for making the “unenhanced/raw” data generated by the payload(s) ava ilable to governments whose territories have been sensed o plans to make the “unenhanced/raw” data available for non -commercial scientific, education and other public -benefit purposes.
• The NZSA may recommend the Minister impose a condition to require insurance to mitigate the risk of the activity. • The Minister may impose further conditions on any licence or permit as they see fit.
• The costs of acquiring a licence are unlikely to be proportional to the risks (despite the regulator’s intention for a light -touch approach.) 61. One submitter proposed that an alternative would be to focus the exemption on teaching and educational purposes so that tertiary institutions and community groups could be included in the exemption for their teaching a ctivities. Only one submitter commented that they supported the establishment of a flexible licensing regime for HAVs. 62. The feedback and follow up discussions with some submitters enabled us to develop a better understanding of the uses of certain HAVs and the risks associated with the technologies. This led us to modify our preferred option as discussed in the Problem Definition (paras 33 -39), and Options and Impact Analysis (paras 48 -54) sections for HAV exemptions in this Regulatory Impact Statement .
• The potential compliance burden associated with licensing, including on educational and recreational organisations and the risk that this would discourage high -altitude launch activities and associated opportunities to develop skills and innovation , and
• There are various mitigation practices that New Zealand can employ , eg asking questions on matters such as history of previous incidents etc. to assess risk profile, as insurers do. • There are countries considering the potential establishment of a global body for space activity, including an international space court. There is an increasing recognition/acceptance of the risks in this space and the need to manage them. • The role of re -insurers is evolving in this area. While many had left this market after expe riencing losses due to mispriced risk some years ago, re -insurers are starting to re -emerge as more data becomes available (thereby providing more data to evaluate and price risk). LeoLab s expects that there is likely to be a re -emergence of re -insurers an d insurance services in this industry and, as this happens, it is likely that clients will increasingly demand this from the satellite operators. • Insurance is just one tool for managing risk. Demanding best practice is another lever for managing risk; to prevent harm from occurring in the first place. A suite of steps can be implemented to appropriately manage risk. • An MBIE staff member seconded from the Ministry of Defence made a similar point about the exponential growth in the risks of collisions in spa ce. provision is necessary in the NZ context because there is no evidence that operators are deterred by liability risks. On the current practice of not imposing insurance requirements on payloa d operators, that is something that needs to be kept under active review and insurance requirements imposed if it appears warranted at the time of an application considering the assessment of risk . The review team agrees with LeoLabs that insurance is only one tool for managing risk and recommends ongoing consideration of other measures for managing risks such as exploring evolving technologies for actively manging debris.
• Where there is a HAV payload : o An overview of the HAV payload and its subsystems, and the payload capabilities and intended uses [e.g. imagery, communications, science, remote sensing etc] o If applicable, a summary of remote sensing capabilities of the HAV payload o If applicable, a summary of who the remote sensing data is to be provided to o A description of the means of communicating with the HAV for the purposes of commanding the HAV or its payload or for the transfer of data collec ted by the HAV 24
• model rockets launched and operated by members of the N ZRA from the NZRA launch site at Taupiri. 52. The preferred option is broader than the minor exemption in the discussion document which would only have exempted primary and secondary schools launching balloons for education purposes . The reason for this is that we now have a better understanding of the technologies most frequently used by HAV operators in New Zealand and the risks associated with these technologies. This has enabled us to develop additional exemptions with sufficient specificity to avoid the r isk of inadvertently exempting activities that should be licensed. 53. Under the OSHAA Act , HAVs that are not capable of reaching high -altitude (i.e. the highest upper limit of controlled airspace) are not in scope of the OSHAA Act . This means amateur act ivities such as high -power model rockets, which only reach about 47,000 feet at the moment, are excluded from the scope of the OSHAA Act . However, we understand that rocketry groups including members of the NZRA are aiming to go higher than this and could potentially be required to be licensed over time. As these activities were not intended to be captured by this regime, we consider it is efficient to exempt them now for the avoidance of doubt. 54. Model rocketry does not pose a risk to national security as the period these rockets are airborne is merely minutes and model rockets are not guided by computer, nor can they be programmed to fly on a particular trajectory. The current process of flying rockets into controlled airspace is managed under the civil aviation regime, and the NZRA runs a high -power rocketry (HPR) certification system that is recognised internationally. In light of this, we also propose an exemption from the HAV licensing requirements for model rockets launched and operated by members of the NZRA Model rockets. 55. The Minister may make or revoke exemptions any time under the OSHAA Act. 15
• the name, principal business address, and place of organisation or incorporation o f the owner of the overseas launch facility. Information for High -altitude vehicle licences Technical capability and safety
…and the effects can be worse for some employees. 3.3 37. As mentioned above, a common problem for many employees is the uncertainty about entitlements a nd payments that is associated with working irregular hours, shift work, or changing hours. The two examples below show some of the difficulties that arise from some employees’ working patterns: Roberta works 10 hours on Monday, 5 hours on Tuesday and 5 ho urs on Wednesday each week. When agreeing what a ‘week’ is with h er employer, there are two obvious options, but they have different consequences: 1 week = 3 days or 1 week = 20 hours. If Roberta takes 1 day of annual holidays on a Monday, she has either t aken a third of a week off (1 week = 3 days ) or she has taken half a week off (1 week = 20 hours). This decision has implications for how much of h er entitlement she has used and how much she gets paid for the day she takes off.
Inconsistent treatment of different technologies that perform similar functions (which would create an uneven playing field for commercial operators). New Zealand cannot adequately control certain high altitude activities which originate from New Zealand’s territory. (The Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet is in the process of briefing relevant Ministers on the national security issues for New Zealand arising from very high altitude activities. This information is classified and cannot be included here.) 69. We wish to make the most of the economic development opportunities associated with near space activities. To do that we need to ensure that New Zealand’s ability to regulate where necessary to protect and advance interests including national security, safety, and environmental impacts is established. The question is which regime is best placed to regulate near space – the Civil Aviation regime or the proposed Space Activities Act? Options 70. The policy objective is to ensure that New Zealand has an enabling regulatory regime that encompasses all of our interests in space, including near space activities. 71. The options we have considered are: Option 1: Status quo (and wait for international consensus as to the best approach to regulate certain very high altitude activities). Option 2: Include very high altitude activities as part of the Civil Aviation Act review. Under this option, very high altitude activities could be regulated through an extension of the Civil Aviation regime to include regulation on national security and national interest grounds. Option 3: Clarify that the proposed Space Activities Act covers activities carried out in near space. Under this option the responsible Minister would have a power to regulate and permit aircraft activities (in particular those of balloons and drones) in near space on the same basis as similar activities carried out by satellites in outer space. Those regulatory functions relating to safety where the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) has jurisdiction would continue to be conducted by the CAA. Option 4: Develop a standalone national security bill to address the national security issues. 72. The advice from the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet is that Option 1 (the status quo) is not a viable option as it exposes New Zealand to immediate national security risks. While other countries are facing similar challenges, there is not yet any international consensus on how they should be addressed, nor any prospect of such consensus in the short term. Based on recent discussions we have had with international space policy experts, Restricted 7yr8upqmdi 2016-06-08 10:27:02 Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Restricted it appears that other countries are at a very early stage in their exploration of potential solutions to this problem. 73. We have ruled out option 4 on the basis that protecting New Zealand’s national security is just one of a suite of objectives that are relevant to space activities and it is not efficient from a regulatory perspective to design a standalone regulatory tool to achieve this objective. 74. This leaves options 2 and 3. The Ministry of Transport is undertaking a review of the Civil Aviation Act. The Civil Aviation Amendment Bill has a priority 3 to be passed in 2016. Regardless of which of these options is preferred, it is desirable to ensure consistency and harmonisation between the (new) space activities regime and the (soon to be revised) civil aviation regime. 75. We have assessed options 2 and 3 using the following criteria:  Territorial jurisdiction: the option should be neutral as to the extent to which New Zealand asserts territorial jurisdiction within near space;  Regulatory efficiency: the option is the minimum necessary to achieve the objectives;  International alignment: consistency with evolving international approaches;  Regulatory effectiveness: well defined regulatory objectives carried out by a fit for purpose mechanism;  Technology neutral: different technologies offering similar services should be regulated consistently. A summary of this assessment is presented in the table below: 7yr8upqmdi 2016-06-08 10:27:02 Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Restricted 76. Th e above assessment supports the option of extending the proposed Space Activities Act to include certain activities operating at very high altitudes. Specifically, this means that: RestrictedExtend the Civil Aviation regime to include regulation of aircraft on national security and national interest grounds Extend the scope of the proposed space activities regime to include certain high altitude activities. Existing regulatory functions where the CAA has jurisdiction (e.g. safety assessments of balloons and drones and pilot qualifications) will continue to be conducted under the Civil Aviation regime Should be neutral as to the extent to which New Zealand asserts territorial jurisdiction The CAA regime already applies to all aircraft regardless of altitude, but it does not currently enable regulation on national security and national interest grounds.  International treaties establish that all nations have free access to outer space. The proposal is to regulate certain high altitude activities because they start from New Zealand (and so we have jurisdiction over the activities). We are not seeking to define where space and airspace begin and end. Regulatory efficiency  Both options appear equal in terms of regulatory efficiency. International alignmentThere has been a suggestion that the International Civil Aviation Organisation’s jurisdiction over international aviation could be extended to include near space activities. However, discussions are at a very early stage and there is no prospect of an international consensus on the best approach emerging in a timeframe useful for our purposes. Regulatory effectivenessX The review of the Civil Aviation Act will propose to regulate aircraft from a national security perspective in lower altitudes (i.e. from the ground up to whatever level we set as the lower limit of the space regime). Cabinet decisions on this proposal will be sought in June. If timing is a critical factor in the decision of where to locate a higher altitude regime then the Space Bill has a slight advantage.  The economic and commercial objectives of the proposed Space Activities Act are as relevant to near space as they are to outer space. Cabinet has agreed that space policy should include all of New Zealand’s interests in space. There is a strong case for keeping the policy and regulatory dimensions of near and outer space activities together. To avoid the perception that New Zealand is seeking to define the limits of outer space to include (part of) what we regard as near space, the high altitude regime will be a separate part of the Space Act. Technology neutralX The CAA regime is predominantly focused on safety of New Zealand’s air transport services. Including higher altitude activities in the space regime will ensure that different technologies providing similar functions are regulated consistently regardless of which altitude they operate at. This is the most compelling argument. 7yr8upqmdi 2016-06-08 10:27:02 Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Restricted  payloads that New Zealand authorities deem capable of being operated at very high altitudes (i.e. near space) are within the scope of the Space Activities Act; and  high-altitude vehicles (i.e. the carrier systems that New Zealand authorities deem capable of taking payloads up into the high altitude region) are also within the scope of the proposed legislation, but (if they are aircraft), the safety aspects of their operation will still be addressed through established Civil Aviation Authority procedures. 77. However, there is as yet no international consensus on the best approach to regulating near space. This means that in this particular area the Space Activities Bill will have to anticipate the evolution of international law in these areas, and we are seeking to do this in a way that is in harmony with international law, not contrary to it. 78. To help manage these risks, the high altitude provisions will be drafted as a separate part of the Space Activities Bill so that they operate as a set of standalone requirements and definitions. This also means that, if necessary, they can be decoupled from the main outer space provisions without impacting on the integrity of those parts of the Bill. Defining the lower limit at which the high altitude regime will apply 7 9.There are three options for defining the limit at which the high altitude regime will apply:  Option 1: Define the limit by reference to flight level 999 (approximately 30km above ground) This is the limit of New Zealand’s flight information region. The advantage of using this limit is that it effectively represents the upper limit of airspace likely to be subject to air traffic control / used by ‘ordinary’ civil aircraft providing air services. The disadvantage of this option is that it will not capture many of the activities that New Zealand security agencies are concerned about.  Option 2 - Define the limit by reference to an altitude of 20km above ground This is a height at which some scientists believe ‘near space ‘begins. This limit would pick up more of the activity that security agencies are concerned about. Its disadvantage is that it may appear arbitrary.  O ption 3 - Define the limit by reference to flight level 600, the current altitude that is the limit of controlled airspace in New Zealand. This is about 18km above ground This option would pick up more of the activities about which the security agencies are concerned. As the limits of controlled airspace are made by a designation under the Civil Aviation Act, this option also has a practical connection with the civil aviation regime which is helpful given the need to harmonise certain criteria for authorising activities under the two regimes. 80. A concern with flight level 600 (option 3) is that it would capture aircraft such as weather balloons which are not intended to be in scope. However, this could be dealt with by including a power for the responsible Minister to make regulations that exempt or exclude (as may be appropriate) specified vehicles or aircraft or classes of vehicles or aircraft which undertake certain activities that are not intended to be subject to the high altitude regulatory regime and are otherwise regulated as appropriate under aviation legislation and regulations. 81. On balance we consider that option 3 is the preferred option as it strikes a balance between: 7yr8upqmdi 2016-06-08 10:27:02 Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Restricted  The risks of setting the limit of near space too high and thereby failing to regulate activities occurring between this limit and the lower options;  The risks of setting the limit too low and thereby inadvertently bringing within the scope of the regulatory regime a whole lot of activity that we do not want to capture. It is possible that flight level 600 will capture some these things but that is why we are proposing that there be the ability to exempt or exclude (as appropriate) specified high altitude vehicles; and  The need to ensure an efficient alignment between the Space Activities Act and the Civil Aviation Act, and to reduce any uncertainty and complexity in relation to the interface between the two regimes. 82. There will also be a review of the Space Activities Act three years after its enactment which will provide an opportunity to ensure harmonisation between the two regulatory regimes. Conclusions and recommendations 83 . A regulatory regime for space activities and certain high altitude activities is necessary for New Zealand to make the most of the economic development and innovation opportunities arising from these technologies while managing security, safety and environmental risks. For space activities, a regulatory regime is also required to ensure that New Zealand can implement the proposed TSA and to meet our other international obligations arising from UN space treaties that we are or intend to become a Party to. The regime needs to be proportionate to the risks and therefore a permissive regime is warranted. Consultation 84 . The following government agencies have been consulted: the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, the Ministry of Transport, the Ministry of Defence, the Ministry for the Environment, the New Zealand Customs Service, the Ministry of Primary Industries, the New Zealand Police, the Treasury, the State Services Commission, the Civil Aviation Authority, and Worksafe New Zealand. The Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet (DPMC) has been informed. DPMC has led consultation with and coordinated input from the relevant New Zealand security agencies. All agencies are in broad agreement with the need for a licencing regime and the specific design option that is being proposed. 85. Rocket Lab has been informed about the options and consulted on the design of the regulatory regime and implementation options. Rocket Lab has emphasised that the regime needs to accommodate relatively low cost and frequent launches of very small satellites, and onerous liability provisions will act as significant deterrent to the development of the industry in New Zealand. We consider that the proposed design can address these concerns through the flexibility to tailor licence requirements to specific circumstances, including an assessment of risks and consequences. 86. We have not publicly consulted on the proposed options while the Government has been in negotiations with the US Government on the proposed TSA Treaty. However, once the TSA negotiations are completed, the Government will make a public announcement that it is developing a regulatory regime for outer space and high altitude activities so that people are aware of the proposals. The public will also have an opportunity to submit on the Bill at Select Committee. Implementation plan 87 . The Government will implement its TSA obligations through a contract with Rocket Lab until legislation is enacted. Draft legislation will be in the public domain before Rocket Lab’s first test launch. Restricted 7yr8upqmdi 2016-06-08 10:27:02 Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act Restricted 88. Key implementation risks relate to building domestic capability to administer a space activities licencing regime and to monitor and enforce the regulatory requirements. However, for the first two years, at least, Rocket Lab will mainly be launching US rockets with US payloads which will be subject to the US commercial space launch and payload licences. 89. In April 2016, Cabinet agreed that MBIE will be the lead agency for space policy for an initial period. MBIE is in the process of developing an implementation plan which will cover the initial period until legislation is enacted and implementation once the new Act enters into force. 90. Compliance costs for the regulated entities will be minimised through flexibility in the legislation to ensure that requirements are proportionate to the perceived level of risk. It is also proposed that the set up costs associated with establishing the new regulatory systems and processes will be met by the Crown. Once the legislation is enacted, a cost recovery fees and levies regime will be established. Monitoring, evaluation and review 9 1.Rocket Lab is the only private entity (that we are currently aware of) seeking to develop a space launch industry in New Zealand. Hence, the number of parties directly affected by the space activities regime is small (limited to Rocket Lab and its suppliers). Given this, we propose to keep in regular contact with Rocket Lab to ensure that the legislation is achieving its purpose. We do not expect large numbers of players to be affected by the high altitude activities part of the regime and there will be a power for the responsible Minister to make regulations that exempt or exclude, as may be appropriate, specified vehicles or classes of vehicles or aircraft which undertake activities that are not intended to be subject to the high altitude regulatory regime and that are otherwise regulated as appropriate under civil aviation law. 92. In light of the speed with which this regulatory regime is being developed (though for good and understandable reasons), combined with the exponential changes in space industry technologies and the space industry overall globally, we propose that there be a review of the regime in two to three years to ensure that the legislation is achieving its purpose. It is also proposed that this review be a legislative requirement in the new Act. 7yr8upqmdi 2016-06-08 10:27:02 Proactive Release Under the Official Information Act
 Schedule 3 : Information required for launch licence or overseas launch licence application: s ee clause 9  Schedule 5 : Information required for facility licence application: see clause 4  Schedule 6 :: Information required for high- altitude licence application: see clause 8
