$15 to Australia and Asia-Pacific countries
$20 to the United States (not Canada)
$235.10 for children aged 15 and under.
$25 to European countries (including the UK)
$25 to search a 3-year period, and
$30 for the rest of the world
$33 for a standard birth certificate
$33 for an official death certificate.
$33 for an official marriage certificate.
$33 if you also want a new copy of your marriage certificate.
$33 or $35 to order a birth certificate with your new sex marker or name, or both, depending on the certificate design you select.
$33.00 for a standard certificate
$35 for a decorative birth certificate
$35.00 for a decorative certificate
$470.20 for adults aged 16 and over
$55 for a pack with a standard and a decorative birth certificate.
$55 to update the sex marker on your birth certificate
$55 to update your name on your marriage or civil union record, and
$55.00 for a pack including 1 standard and 1 decorative certificate.
(New Zealand Electronic Travel Authority)
(treasure) that our government works to protect. Learn about the history of
) 2.1 at Level AA, as per the
) and an enduring power of attorney (
) and enduring power of attorney (
) archive at Trentham military camp has about 1.5 million personnel files for 420,000 people who have served in the armed forces, post World War I. A request for a record must be authorised if the person is still alive.
) are available when you take time off from work to care for a baby or child under 6 or recover from pregnancy. This is separate from parental leave.
) are often mistaken for being the same but they have some important differences.
) became the The Natural Hazards Commission (
) became the The Social Investment Agency (
) client, you can apply online through MyMSD. Otherwise, you can call Work and Income to discuss your situation and apply.
) for personal care and welfare or property in place.
) has accepted your claim, you may be able to get help with transport costs.
) if you have questions about tax, such as:
) is a statutory body established under the Game Animal Council Act 2013 to represent the interests of the hunting sector and improve the management of game animals (deer, tahr, chamois and wild pigs) while contributing to positive conservation outcomes.
) lists the amounts for the:
) owns and manages the content on this website.
) versions are provided alongside some, but not all
) was integrated into the
), contact the Congratulatory Messages team and they will make sure the person receives the King
+64 3 943 4259 (outside NZ)
+64 4 474 2750 (outside NZ)
+64 4 917 3107 (calling from overseas)
+64 9 969 2950 (outside NZ)
, Wellington or Christchurch. You'll need photo ID.
, and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade.
, ask your lawyer to provide instructions that:
, caregivers and community
, the Firearms Safety Authority as soon as possible.
, the Police, and those in health and education
, the family court can get involved.
, the fire and other emergency functions of 40 organisations were combined into Fire and Emergency New Zealand.
, there are 2 types of records in the HART register, mandatory and voluntary:
, what it covers and who you want to make decisions for you.
, with an independent board.
, you give them the power to do anything with your money, property and other assets that you could do if you were personally present.
, you select a celebrant and pay $150 for the licence.
, your family can apply to the family court to have someone appointed as your property manager.
- Archives New Zealand website
- New Zealand History website
. Be as specific as possible.
. Govt.nz is your guide to finding and using government services.
. Include an international bank draft in NZ dollars to pay the fee. Make it payable to the Department of Internal Affairs.
. Only the unique aspects of an
. Passports are valid for 10 years.
. The 2016 Act replaced the
. This depends on how aware the donor is of those connections.
. You will be charged a fee for this.
0508 426 678 (0508 4 CONSUMER)
1130 Paradise Valley Road
142 Featherston Street (entry on Johnston St.)
167b Victoria Street West
19 Ellesmere Junction Road
2 identical passport-style photos, verified by a witness.
2 passport photos that meet the photo requirements.
2. Collect your documents
2. Complete the application form
2. Sign the form in front of a Registrar of Marriages
20 or older, and a relative of the child, or
25 or older, and at least 20 years older than the child, or
3. Go into an NZ Transport Agency licensing agent
3. Submit your application form
6 steps to get your money Sorted
838 - 842 Fergusson Drive
A Community Services Card can reduce healthcare costs. Anyone on a low income who is aged 16 or over, a NZ citizen or permanent resident and normally lives here, can apply.
A background for text to set it apart from the main content, for example breadcrumbs, and notes such as alerts or warnings.
A birth certificate costs:
A caveat (for marriages) or a notice of objection (for civil unions) is a written document that explains the legal reasons why you think someone should not be allowed a marriage licence.
A certified copy is a photocopy that has been stamped or endorsed by a witness (for example, a Justice of the Peace) who confirms that the copy is a true copy of the original document.
A civil union certificate is an official record of a civil union.
A civil union is the formalisation of a relationship between two people, regardless of gender, in accordance with the Civil Union Act 2004. Some overseas countries may not recognise New Zealand civil unions so you may want to seek independent legal advice before deciding to enter into a civil union. A celebrant must conduct your civil union.
A congratulatory message will be sent from:
A lawyer may represent you at any time during the process.
A little preparation here, possibly in your statement of wishes, helps your loved ones a lot.
A name change certificate is an official record of a name change if they were born outside NZ.
A notary public, sometimes called a public notary, is a lawyer authorised by the Archbishop of Canterbury in England to officially witness signatures on legal documents, collect sworn statements, administer oaths and certify the authenticity of legal documents for use overseas.
A nurse or other health professional may visit you at home to help with your medications and medical needs. Learn more about these services and if you qualify.
A person appointed by the family court to make decisions about property and financial affairs for someone who lacks the capacity to make these decisions for themselves.
A person appointed by the family court to make personal care and welfare decisions for someone who lacks the capacity to make these decisions for themselves.
A person can appeal decisions about:
A personal care and welfare
A personal order is for decisions which would usually be part of an
A printout can be emailed to you. A certificate must be posted, or given to you in person if you order it at a Births, Deaths and Marriages office.
A range of features about the Treaty and Waitangi Day
A recent survey found more than 550 government websites with a government domain name (.govt.nz). We know there are many more registered with .org or .co.nz. The government spends $75 million maintaining these every year.
A satellite office is located at the Hawke's Bay Business Hub, providing business development assistance.
A screaming highlight used for search buttons, warning style box and error messages.
A separation agreement is the best option for most people who have children or property together. You can make the agreement yourselves, in writing or verbally (it has to be written if it includes information about property you share). It should include the date you agreed to separate.
A specialist is a medical practitioner who is trained in a specific field of medicine. You usually need to visit your general practitioner (doctor) first for a referral to a specialist.
A statement of wishes is also a quick way to communicate your burial or cremation wishes.
A step by step guide to separating and getting divorced in NZ.
A trial period is a timeframe that employers can use to find out if you are suitable for a job. An employer can dismiss you and you cannot raise a personal grievance for unjustified dismissal if the trial period was valid.
A warrant of fitness (WoF) or certificate of fitness inspection is a regular check to make sure your vehicle is safe.
A welfare guardian is appointed if the family court believes this is the only way to make sure the right personal care and welfare decisions are made for you.
A well-planned retirement helps you enjoy life with those you love.
A will is a set of instructions for after someone dies. The person lists what they want to happen with their:
A-Z list of government organisations
AGMARDT invests in the following areas:
ARLA is supported by the Ministry of Justice.
About the accessibility of this website
Abuse, harassment and domestic violence
Acceptable evidence of identity for a driver licence application
Accepted documents include:
Access and correct your personal information
Access to information about your previous registered sex and name can only be provided under specific circumstances under section 107 of the Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration Act 2021 (BDMRRA), and approved by the Registrar-General of Births, Deaths and Marriages.
Access to your birth, marriage and name change records
Accessibility tips for using this website
Accessible option for 111
Accident Compensation Corporation
Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC)
Act, and manage the Natural Hazard Fund, including by investing in the Fund in accordance with the
Acting Chief Executive Officer
Acting Chief Executive and Comptroller
Acting Chief Executive and Government Statistician
Acting Public Service Commissioner
Acting Secretary for Education
Activate your EPA for personal care and welfare
Activate your property EPA
Add burial or cremation instructions
Adding link sharing of our pages to social media platforms does not imply we endorse these sites or that there is any obligation for you to share to platforms you belong to or have not already joined.
Administrative and legal tasks can feel extra stressful without the certainties from a will.
Adobe Acrobat Reader - Get Adobe
Adopted between 1949 and 2005, inclusive
Adopted in or before 1948
Adopted in or before 1977
Adopting a child born via surrogacy
Adopting a child from overseas
Advertising Standards Authority
Advertising Standards Authority (ASA)
Advising and making recommendations to the Minister of Conservation on hunting issues.
After a successful application: deal with the estate
After someone dies, an executor or administrator needs to be appointed by the High Court to deal with the estate.
After the dissolution order takes effect
After you apply for NZ citizenship
After your child turns 1 and 2 years of age
Agree how to share care of any children
Agricultural and Marketing Research and Development Trust
Agricultural and Marketing Research and Development Trust (AGMARDT)
Air Force Museum of New Zealand
Air NZ Customer Relations
Air New Zealand operates scheduled passenger services:
Alcohol Regulatory and Licensing Authority
Alcohol and Drug Helpline
Alexander Turnbull Library
All New Zealand citizens and permanent residents can get a congratulatory message for:
All New Zealanders are entitled to basic human rights and freedoms to protect them from unlawful discrimination. Find out about your rights, and how to get help or make a complaint.
All data usage will be charged back to the government agencies that sponsor the websites you visit.
All documents must be original or certified copies. If you provide a certified copy of a document, it must be certified by a New Zealand embassy or consulate, or authorised Department of Internal Affairs (DIA) counter staff.
All forms of post-secondary school education and training come under their umbrella. This includes:
All information is anonymised to protect your identity and personal information. That means that you cannot be identified by any comments, quotes, images or location.
All other claims, including claims for earthquake damage which occured after 5 April 2012, are still dealt with by AMI.
All parents and guardians must provide copies of 2 different documents that show their current name. These do not need to be certified.
All parents or guardians must provide a certified copy of 1 of the following:
Allied Nationwide Finance
Also, some applications may require additional checks with external agencies to verify the descent claim.
An alleged offence has occurred and legal action will be taken.
An apostille is an official government certificate that proves the signature, stamp or seal on a document is genuine for use in countries that are members of the 1961 Hague Convention Treaty.
An apostille or authentication is an official government certificate that proves the signature, stamp or seal on a document is genuine.
An authentication is an official government certificate that proves the signature, stamp or seal on a document is genuine. Authentication is sometimes called 'legalisation'.
An enduring power of attorney (
An enduring power of attorney for personal care and welfare is one of the 2 types of
An enduring power of attorney for property is one of the 2 types of
An objection lasts for one year unless you withdraw it.
An ordinary or general power of attorney (
An ordinary power of attorney (
An overseas marriage is usually valid unless it would be illegal in NZ, for example bigamy. If you want to check your marriage is legal here, you can apply to the Family Court for a declaration. Talk to a lawyer to find out if you need to do this.
And is still responsible for their previous functions to deliver:
Animal Control Products Ltd
Animal Control Products, trading as Orillion, supplies pest control tools to:
Any additional apostilles and e-apostilles will cost $15
Any additional category A authentications will cost $31
Any additional category B authentications will cost $61
Any personal identifying information gathered for user research is stored securely then deleted when the project is completed.
Anyone can ask their employer to transfer a public holiday to another day.
Anyone can be a victim of financial abuse. Find out about financial abuse and scams and how to protect yourself or someone you care for.
Anyone convicted of a crime in a New Zealand court, and who believes they have suffered a miscarriage of justice over their conviction or sentence, or both, can apply to the CCRC for an independent review of their case.
Apostille and authentication categories
Apostille or authentication
Apostilles and authentications are certificates that prove the signature, stamp or seal on a document is genuine.
Apostilles do not need to go to MFAT for checking.
Application for a replacement driver licence (PDF 158KB)
Application for certificate of no impediment to marriage or civil union BDM 189 (PDF 311KB)
Application for certificate of no impediment to marriage or civil union BDM 189 accessible alternative (TXT 37KB)
Application processing times vary. Check this page for regularly updated timeframes:
Application to register a change of name and update sex marker on birth certificate (PDF 410KB)
Application to register a change of name and update sex marker on birth certificate 15 and under (PDF 456KB)
Application to register a change of name and update sex marker on birth certificate 15 and under accessible alternative (TXT 14KB)
Application to register a change of name and update sex marker on birth certificate accessible alternative (TXT 13KB)
Application to register a change of name and update sex marker on birth certificate aged 16 and 17 (PDF 396KB)
Application to register a change of name and update sex marker on birth certificate aged 16 and 17 accessible alternative (TXT 17KB)
Application to register a name change BDM 120 (PDF 424KB)
Application to register a name change BDM120 (PDF 586KB)
Application to register a name change BDM120 accessible alternative (TXT 22KB)
Application to register a name change accessible alternative (TXT 14KB)
Application to register a name change aged 15 and under BDM123 (PDF 472KB)
Application to register a name change aged 15 and under accessible alternative (TXT 27KB)
Application to register a name change aged 15 years and under BDM123 (PDF 412KB)
Application to register a name change aged 16 and 17 BDM 121 (PDF 405KB)
Application to register a name change aged 16 and 17 accessible alternative (TXT 20KB)
Application to register a name change aged 16 and 17 years BDM121 (PDF 414KB)
Application to register a name change within 2 years of birth BDM 36 (PDF 477KB)
Application to register a name change within 2 years of birth BDM36 (PDF 417KB)
Application to register a name change within 2 years of birth BDM36 accessible alternative (TXT 15KB)
Application to register a name change within 2 years of birth accessible alternative (TXT 15KB)
Application to update sex marker on birth certificate (PDF 353KB)
Application to update sex marker on birth certificate 15 and under (PDF 429KB)
Application to update sex marker on birth certificate 15 and under accessible alternative (TXT 21KB)
Application to update sex marker on birth certificate accessible alternative (TXT 14KB)
Application to update sex marker on birth certificate aged 16 and 17 (PDF 360KB)
Application to update sex marker on birth certificate aged 16 and 17 accessible alternative (TXT 15KB)
Applications currently take around 30 working days, plus delivery.
Applications may require checks with external agencies to verify the descent claim. In some cases external checks can take months to complete. We will contact you directly if this applies to your application.
Apply by post or in person
Apply for Best Start payments
Apply for NZ citizenship if born in Samoa before 1949
Apply for a New Zealand passport
Apply for a birthday message
Apply for a child passport
Apply for a child's first passport
Apply for a congratulatory message
Apply for a dissolution order (divorce)
Apply for a divorce on your own
Apply for a personal order
Apply for a wedding anniversary message
Apply for a welfare guardian
Apply for a working holiday visa
Apply for an adult passport
Apply for citizenship by grant
Apply for day-to-day care and solve disagreements
Apply for help to pay the court fees for a civil or family case
Apply for help with the costs of heating your home, or check advice for keeping those expenses down.
Apply for information on the register
Apply for or renew a child passport
Apply for your first adult passport
Apply online for a marriage licence
Apply to be the administrator
Apply to handle the estate
Apply to register your citizenship by descent
Apply to the Family Court
Applying for NZ Superannuation
Applying for a divorce on your own
Applying for a divorce together
Applying for citizenship by grant costs:
Applying to administer an estate is a legal process with a fee.
Applying under eligibility criteria 2
Applying under eligibility criteria 3
Applying under eligibility criteria 4
Approved applications are sent for processing and then the congratulatory messages are posted.
Approved overseas auditors and associations of accountants
Ara Institute of Canterbury
Archives New Zealand holds records about New Zealand's military history.
Archives New Zealand is in the process of putting the military records of everyone who served in World War I online.
Are you single or in a relationship?
As a business unit within Te Kawa Mataaho Public Service Commission, LDC is the primary delivery vehicle for sector-wide leadership development.
As a citizen by descent, you may also be eligible to apply for citizenship by grant. If you are successful, any future children you have who are born outside New Zealand can
As a contrast to the blue subtle highlight, for example visited links.
As a regulator of the takeovers market, the Panel:
As a state-owned enterprise, AsureQuality helps farmers, growers and food producers in meeting their compliance requirements and upholding these high standards of food quality and safety.
As an NZ citizen, you can enrol your children in Australian schools. You and your family can study at Australian universities or polytechnics. If you already have a qualification it may be recognised, or you may have to apply for assessment.
As part of the egg donation process, you'll have:
As part of the link to Govt.nz, government websites should use a visible NZ government logo.
As soon as your pregnancy is confirmed you need to choose a lead maternity carer (
As the executor (probate) or administrator (letter), you make sure that the wishes of the person who died happen.
As well as maternity and paternity leave, there are other leave options for eligible parents and carers. You may be able to get parental leave payments from the government.
Ashburton District Council
Asia New Zealand Foundation
Ask a question about the Govt.nz website, suggest an improvement to the website, or report a problem about the website to the Govt.nz team.
Ask for a referral to a fertility clinic
Ask the overseas organisation which type of apostille they want.
Associate Minister for ACC
Associate Minister for Energy
Associate Minister for Social Development and Employment
Associate Minister for Sport and Recreation
Associate Minister for the Environment
Associate Minister of Agriculture
Associate Minister of Agriculture (Animal Welfare, Skills)
Associate Minister of Agriculture (Horticulture)
Associate Minister of Defence
Associate Minister of Education (Partnership Schools)
Associate Minister of Finance
Associate Minister of Foreign Affairs
Associate Minister of Health
Associate Minister of Health (Pharmac)
Associate Minister of Housing (Social Housing)
Associate Minister of Immigration
Associate Minister of Justice (Firearms)
Associate Minister of Police
Associate Minister of Transport
At a minimum, this website aims to:
At least 1 of your adoptive parents was a New Zealand citizen (by birth or by grant) at the time of your adoption.
At least one of the people applying must be:
At the time of your adoption, at least 1 of your
At the time of your birth, at least 1 of your
At their offices you can:
Auckland (English, business, construction and postgraduate design programmes for international students).
Auckland / Waikato Fish and Game Council
Auckland Bioengineering Institute
Auckland District Health Board
Auckland Policy Office (APO)
Auckland Regional Council
Auckland University of Technology
Australia, Asia, Pacific $15
Australian passport (or other evidence of Australian citizenship) and a birth certificate
Authentication Unit contact details
Authentication Unit document requirements
Authentication Unit requirements
Authentication category A
Authentication category B
Autonomous crown entities
Aviation Security Service
Aviation Security Service (Avsec)
Avsec is the official provider of aviation security in New Zealand.
BDM130 General identity declaration (PDF 2.3 MB)
BDM401 Application to record (or update) donor details on the Human Assisted Reproductive Technology Register (PDF 84 KB)
BDM402 Application to record (or update) donor-conceived person details on the Human Assisted Reproductive Technology Register (PDF 99 KB)
BDM403 Application by donor to access information held on the Human Assisted Reproductive Technology Register (PDF 43 KB)
BDM404 Application by donor-conceived person (or guardian) to access information held on the Human Assisted Reproductive Technology Register (PDF 46 KB)
BDM405 Authorisation for disclosure of information to agent (PDF 27 KB)
BDM406 Access to and disclosure of identifying information (PDF 480 KB)
BDM460 Request a document authentication or apostille (PDF 401KB)
BDM460 Request a document authentication or apostille accessible version (TXT 6.2KB)
Bay of Plenty District Health Board
Bay of Plenty Regional Council
Bay of Plenty Regional Council (BOPRC)
Bay of Plenty family services
Be polite when sending feedback to the Govt.nz team
Become a certified translator
Become an independent celebrant
Become an organisational celebrant
Before any information can be released, 2 additional medical practitioners must sign the application.
Before content is published, your information must meet at least 1 of the following criteria.
Before dealing with an estate, you need to apply for either:
Before making a claim to the tribunal you must first make a complaint either to the Human Rights Commission, the Privacy Commissioner or the Health and Disability Commissioner.
Before you accept a job, you need to agree on your pay, hours and working conditions. You can apply for money to help pay the costs of starting a new job.
Before you apply for a divorce, known as a dissolution order, through the Family Court, you need to:
Before you apply for a student visa
Before you apply, check you meet the requirements to become a New Zealand citizen.
Before you get married overseas
Before you leave New Zealand, make sure your NZ passport is valid.
Before you make a complaint about a marriage or civil union celebrant, you should think about how you want your complaint resolved.
Before you make a complaint to the Registrar-General:
Before you send any documents, check the Department of Internal Affairs Authentication Unit's requirements. You may need to provide either an original or a copy that has been notorised.
Before you send your documents to the Authentication Unit, check if they need to be:
Being deprived of NZ citizenship
Benefits Review Committee
Bernard Spragg NZ, Flickr, 31 January 2014
Best Start is 1 of 4 types of Working for Families payments. You might qualify for some or all of the other types of payments.
Between 1888 and 1910 some records exist, but they are not complete.
Between Monday 27 January and Friday 7 February
Birth certificate application form
Birth certificates and source documents FAQ (PDF 98KB)
Birth certificates and source documents FAQ accessible (TXT 3KB)
Birth certificates, citizenship, passports, changing name or gender
Birth, Death and Marriage Historical Records
Births Deaths & Marriages Online
Births, Deaths and Marriages
Births, Deaths and Marriages (BDM) registers and maintains New Zealand birth, death, marriage, civil union and name change information, and issues certificates and printouts.
Births, Deaths and Marriages can only make changes to New Zealand birth certificates.
Births, Deaths and Marriages office
Births, Deaths and Marriages offices
Births, Deaths and Marriages online
Births, deaths and marriages
Births, deaths and marriages in NZ
Births, deaths, marriages
Blue and orange are the primary colours, so they're used first. Other colours are only introduced if needed. Infographics or illustrations use these colours as a starting point.
Born and adopted in New Zealand (NZ), the Cook Islands, Niue or Tokelau
Born and adopted on or after 1 January 2006
Born and adopted outside NZ
Born before and adopted after 1 January 2006
Born between 1978 and 2005
Born outside NZ and adopted in NZ
Borrowing against the value of your home
Both parents need to complete the birth registration, unless 1 parent is:
Both your mother and your father must sign the form.
Bringing pets into New Zealand
Bringing things into New Zealand
British Antarctic Territory
Broadcasting Standards Authority
Building 5, Central Park Corporate Centre
Building 7, Central Park Corporate Centre
Building Practitioners Board
Building System Performance
Building System Performance (BSP) is responsible for managing NZ building laws and regulations that protect public safety and property.
Business, work, employment rights, paid parental leave
But you cannot pass on New Zealand citizenship to children you have outside New Zealand.
Buying a house, apartment or a rental property
Buying or building one home to live in
Buying, renting, selling, building, rates, renovating, insulation
By making investments that allow the New Zealand Superannuation Fund to grow, they are helping lessen the tax burden of future taxpayers in NZ.
By packaging content from both government and private sectors, these websites offer clear and practical information on topics such as:
By viewing and using this site, you agree to these Terms of use.
CC-BY 4.0 international licence terms
CD's and sound recordings
CIIL currently has four investments which it manages:
Call 0800 COURTS (0800 268 787) for enquires or for an update on your case.
Call Births, Deaths and Marriages
Canterbury District Health Board
Canterbury family services
Capital and Coast District Health Board
Careers NZ are responsible for supporting New Zealanders' to have the skills, knowledge and training opportunities for lifelong success.
Careers NZ is a resource for:
Careers New Zealand is now owned and maintained by the
Caregiving and foster care enquiry form
Caregiving support and learning
Caring for someone with a health condition, injury or illness
Cars, vans, motorcycles, mopeds and trucks need to be registered and issued number plates to be legally driven on our roads.
Carterton District Council
Catch History Review Committee
Category A authentications
Category B authentications
Celebrants can get support and information, and opportunities for professional development.
Celebrants can legally perform marriages and/or civil unions in New Zealand. If you want to become a celebrant, you can choose to be independent or connected with an approved church or organisation. Once you're registered you need to renew your registration each year and keep your contact details up-to-date.
Celebrants set their own fees on top of the cost of the licence.
Celebrants they have separate fees.
Central Otago District Council
Central Plains Water Limited Stage
Central South Island Fish and Game Council
Certificate of no impediment
Certificate, printout or source document
Certified fertility providers
Chairperson/Surveyor-General
Change a civil union to a marriage
Change the gender on your birth certificate
Change the registered sex on a birth certificate
Change the registered sex on your birth certificate
Change your child's name application form
Change your driver licence record
Change your gender in your passport
Change your gender on your official ID
Change your name in your passport
Change your name on your driver licence
Change your name on your official IDs
Change your own name application form
Change, replace or cancel your
Change, replace or cancel your EPA
Changes to your birth certificate
Changing from citizenship by descent to citizenship by grant
Changing or cancelling your application
Changing to hospital-level care
Changing your child's name
Changing your citizenship status
Changing your name on your driver licence
Changing your name when you get married
Changing your study plans
Charles Fergusson Building
Chatham Islands family services
Check document requirements with the overseas organisation
Check if you are a citizen
Check if you need an NZeTA or a visitor visa
Check if you need to apply to the High Court
Check if you need to include other documents
Check that you understand the decision-making process for burials and cremations.
Check the Authentication Unit's document requirements:
Check the Ministry of Health website for clinics in your area:
Check the country you are using your document in
Check the dates of the national public holidays and regional anniversary days.
Check the progress of your application
Check the progress of your application:
Check this information from the Citizens Advice Bureau (
Check this page for regularly updated BDM service timeframes:
Check this page for regularly updated service timeframes:
Check this page for regularly updated timeframes:
Check this page regularly for up-to-date BDM processing times.
Check what to think about and organise before you die. You can also create your own plan on the End of Life Service website.
Check which visas you'll need and organise to get them well ahead of your travel dates.
Check you meet the criteria and have the required documents before you apply, then download and complete an application form.
Check you meet the requirements
Check you meet the requirements for NZ citizenship
Check your complaint meets the criteria
Check your mobile-network provider
Check your own credit record
Checking the surname on your birth certificate
Chief Archivist and General Manager
Chief Executive & Secretary of Defence
Chief Executive / Chief Review Officer
Chief Executive and Commissioner
Chief Executive and Director
Chief Executive and Secretary
Chief Executive and Secretary for the Environment
Chief Executive and Secretary of Foreign Affairs and Trade
Chief Executive, and Secretary for Culture and Heritage
Chief Human Rights Commissioner
Chief Parliamentary Counsel
Child and Youth Mortality Review Committee
Child care and support, paternity, adoption, surrogacy, marriage consent, donor issues.
Child passports are for children aged 15 and under. They cost $144 and are valid for 5 years. When a child turns 16, their passport is still valid until it expires or is cancelled.
Child support is paid by parents who do not live with their children, or who share care of their children with someone else.
Childcare and supervision
Children aged 15 or under
Children do not have to meet all the same requirements as adults to get New Zealand citizenship.
Children you can apply for
Chinese notarial certificate and a letter or valid resident permit / visa from Immigration New Zealand confirming resident status
Choose the gender on your citizenship record
Choose the kind of ceremony you want then follow the step-by-step guide.
Choose the kind of ceremony you want then follow the step-by-step guide. You must get married by a celebrant.
Choose the right tax code for your NZ Superannuation
Choose to be the executor
Choose your lead maternity carer
Choose your residential care
Choosing the gender on your citizenship record
Christchurch City Council
Christchurch City Libraries has an extensive list of Australian family history resources.
Citizens by descent cannot pass on New Zealand citizenship to any children they have outside New Zealand.
Citizenship Offices contact information
Citizenship and passport application
Citizenship by grant for your child
Citizenship by grant for yourself
City Rail Link (CRL) is NZ's largest transport infrastructure project.
Civic Administration Building
Civil Aviation Authority of New Zealand
Clarity and peace of mind for your loved ones
Climate Change Commission
Cnr Anglesea and Nisbet Street
Cnr Anglesea and Nisbet Streets
Cnr Hanover and Harrow Streets
Code companies are New Zealand-registered companies that are listed on the
Colour accessibility is important for people who may:
Colours, images and logos
Community organisations and local services
Community services card, food safety, dental care, help at home
Complain about a TV or radio programme or an ad
Complain about a celebrant to the Registrar-General
Complain about a government department
Complain about a marriage or civil union celebrant
Complain about a privacy breach
Complain about discrimination
Complain about home help and support services
Complain about something you bought
Complain about your financial services provider
Complain about your utility provider
Complain to the Ombudsman
Complaints about an approved organisation celebrant
Complete a form for each enduring power of attorney (EPA or EPOA) you want to create. Save on legal fees by planning ahead.
Complete a parenting through separation course
Complete the application and sign the form
Complex estates often take longer.
Conducting game animal research.
Congratulatory Message Service team
Congratulatory messages are sent by post 10 days before the birthday or wedding anniversary but you can ask for them to be sent earlier.
Congratulatory messages for significant birthdays and wedding anniversaries is a free service for all New Zealand citizens and permanent residents who live in New Zealand.
Conservation House - Whare Kaupapa Atawhai
Consider these options before you create your
Consider your options before creating this EPA
Consider your options before setting up a property EPA
Consultations across government
Consumer rights and complaints
Contact Banking Ombudsman
Contact Births, Deaths and Marriages
Contact Celebrants Aotearoa
Contact Commerce Commission
Contact Identity and passports
Contact NZ Customs Service
Contact Office of the Privacy Commissioner
Contact a NZ embassy overseas
Contact an MP or the NZ Parliament
Contact and agency details
Contact details and information for all government departments and organisations.
Contact details for qualified midwives who are members of the
Contact details for the Office of the Privacy Commissioner
Contact one of our offices in New Zealand
Contact one of the following organisations:
Contact the Citizenship Office
Contact the Citizenship Office below to check your citizenship status.
Contact the Citizenship Office to check your citizenship status.
Contact the Citizenship Office to request an evidentiary certificate:
Contact the NZ Parliament
Contact the authorities in the country where you plan to get married and check their rules and requirements.
Contact the embassy of the country where the person was born or died.
Contact us through NZ Relay
Contact your local service centre
Contact: Congratulatory Message Service team
Contacts for legal and financial advice
Content is in plain English, so the website is easy to read and easy to understand. The content on the site is organised in the way you search for information.
Content is obscured at high zoom levels
Content is often duplicated across a number of government websites. For example, there are over 70 government websites that provide information about work and jobs.
Continue to broaden your skills while working. You can become better at your job, increase your chance for a promotion or change your career entirely.
Controller and Auditor-General
Convert your overseas driver licence
Cook Islands, Niue or Tokelau birth certificate
Cooperation and health services
Copyright and attribution
Copyright in photographs on Govt.nz is not owned or licensed to you by the Crown. Unless otherwise stated in relation to specific photographs, you cannot copy, distribute or adapt any photograph without the agreement of the copyright owner.
Corner East Tamaki Road and Newbury Street
Corner Molesworth and Aitken Streets
Corner of King and Princess Streets
Corner of Molesworth and Aitken Streets
Corner of North Road and Price Street
Countries that have signed up to the Hague Convention on Intercountry Adoption
Course delivery is a blend of face to face and online activity which suits a range of learners including those still in full-time employment.
Courses are offered at the main Otaki campus and at a number of sites around Aotearoa, NZ.
Courses are offered through the:
Court fees for civil & family court cases
Create an enduring power of attorney
Create your EPA for personal care and welfare
Create your EPA for property
Credit records, consumer rights, complaints, debt, privacy
Credit, debit or prepaid gift card (for example Prezzy card) by adding your payment details to the form.
Criminal Cases Review Commission
Criminal Cases Review Commission (CCRC)
Criteria for putting information on Govt.nz
Cromwell, Central Otago (courses such as snowsports, horticulture, sports turf management and sustainability)
Crown Asset Management Limited
Crown Infrastructure Partners Limited
Crown Irrigation Investments Limited
Crown Irrigation Investments Limited (CIIL)
Crown Irrigation Investments Limited (CIIL) is an investment management focused business.
Crown Research Institutes
Crown entity subsidiaries
DIA disclaims and excludes all liability for any claim, loss, demand or damages of any kind whatsoever (including for negligence) arising out of or in connection with the use of either this website or the information, content or materials included on this site or on any website we link to.
DIA is part of a whole-of-government approach to surrogacy matters. This fact sheet was produced jointly by DIA, Immigration New Zealand,
DIA may require proof of your identity before being able to provide you with any personal information.
DIA may revise these Terms of use at any time. Any such revisions take effect when this page is published.
Dates for public holidays and anniversary days
Dates when employees get national public holidays and regional anniversary days.
David Pimborough, Shutterstock
Day-to-day care and other responsibilities for guardians
Day-to-day care is not automatic
Daylight saving, freedom camping, natural resources, fishing, hunting
Days in lieu (alternative holidays)
Death of a firearms licence holder
Debt Repayment Orders, and
Debt collection and repossession
Decide not to participate
Decision-making for burial or cremation
Decisions your attorneys cannot make
Default text colour for body text and page headers.
Defence Employer Support Council
Defence Force issues medals to former and serving New Zealand military personnel.
Definitions of enduring power of attorney roles
Deliver to an overseas address
Democratic Republic of Congo
Denise Church QSO CFInstD
Department of Conservation
Department of Corrections
Department of Internal Affairs
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
Depending on how much you earn and how old your children are, your family may be able to get help with the cost of childcare.
Depending on the emergency, NEMA lead or support the response and recovery. NEMA work to build the capability and capacity of the emergency management system to reduce risk, to be ready for emergencies, and to respond and recover from them.
Depending on your situation, you may have to pay this money back.
Depending on your situation, you may need to provide additional documents.
Depending on your skills, where you come from, your age and other factors you may be able to work in New Zealand temporarily for more than 3 months.
Deposit an overseas divorce or dissolution certificate
Depression and Anxiety Helpline
Deputy Privacy Commissioner
Descent registration and passport timeframes
Develop positive relationships between the Game Animal Council and stakeholders through effective liaison, advice and communication.
Develops new materials, products and approaches to assist other agencies with sustainable management of risk, environment and natural Earth and groundwater resources
Device set up and assistive technology support
Dial 111 in a medical emergency
Difference between an apostille and an authentication
Different organisations can help you with your retirement and other related topics.
Digital Identity Services Trust Framework regulator
Digital Public Services branch
Digital accounts and assets can be frustrating in the best of times. Being organised with these is definitely an act of love for those close to you.
Director-General of Health and Chief Executive
Director-General of Security
Disagree with child support amount
Discover jobs that would suit you, find and apply for vacancies, and prepare for interviews.
Disposal of firearms and ammunition
Disputes when buying a car
District inquiries relate to a paricular place or piece of land, and generic inquiries deal with everything else.
Division of Arts, Law, Psychology and Social Sciences
Division of Health, Engineering, Computing and Science
Do not get it certified by a justice of the peace or a solicitor. If you do, your document will not be able to be apostilled or authenticated.
Do not send us sensitive personal information or include it in feedback forms or surveys.
Do not staple, glue or paperclip photos to the application form as this may damage the photos.
Do you want to have a successor (back-up) attorney? You can only have 1.
Do you want to have the same attorney as your partner?
Do you want to have the same attorneys as your partner?
Doctors and practice nurses work in a general practice (medical centre). Find a medical centre to enrol with.
Doctors, dentists and prescriptions
Documents are sent to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade and to international embassies for authentication (sometimes also called 'legalisation').
Documents are sent to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade to do a check.
Documents you must include
Dog owner fines and offences
Dog problems and complaints
Domestic and family violence
Donors and donor-conceived people or their parents or guardians must complete both a:
Donors can ask to find out the name of any children born from their donation, but the child has to be 18 or older and give permission.
Donors will not be automatically identifiable for donations made before 22 August 2005.
Donors, donor-conceived people or their parents or guardians can:
Download and complete the application form:
Download the application form
Drives innovation and sustainable economic growth in our energy sector
Driving fines and penalties
Driving in NZ if you are visiting
Drug Free Sport New Zealand
Drug Free Sport New Zealand is now part of the Sport Integrity Commission.
Due to your lack of mobility, you now need hospital-level care. Unfortunately your current facility does not provide this. Your anxiety and worry about moving to another care home is also affecting your health.
Dunedin (main campus offering most courses)
ED0265: Mutual transactions of associations (including clubs and societies)
EFTPOS (only available when you visit an office in person)
EPA for property: Disposal of firearms, arms items and ammunition
EPL has built an online payroll service for schools called EdPay.
ERO reviews schools and early childhood education services, and publishes national reports on current education practice. Their reports are used by parents, teachers, school principals, early childhood education managers, boards of trustees and policy makers.
Early learning services generally follow the same terms and holiday dates as state schools.
Eastern Fish and Game Council
Eastern Institute of Technology
Education New Zealand (ENZ)
Education Review Office (ERO)
Education for children with a physical disability or illness
Education scholarships, grants and awards
Educational certificate or school report
Electrical Workers Registration Board
Electricity Corporation of New Zealand Limited
Eligibility for public funding
Ellesmere Junction Road/Springs Road
Email addresses are not made available to the public. Unless required by law, we will not disclose the names or email addresses of individuals who provide feedback to us or who provide us with submission forms without their consent.
Email us for further information.
Emergencies can have consequences for people, communities, property, infrastructure, the economy and the environment. NEMA support communities to reduce the impact of emergencies across all hazards and risks.
Emergencies in New Zealand
Emergencies, health advice, and workplace safety
Employees must be paid at least the minimum hourly wage rate for every hour worked.
Employment Relations Authority
Employment Relations Authority (ERA)
Employment rights and complaints
Enduring Power of Attorney (EPA) for personal care and welfare
Enduring Power of Attorney (EPA) for property
Enduring power of attorney
Energy Efficiency and Conservation Authority
English as a second language
English for speakers of other languages
Enhance the quality of game animal herds while maintaining or enhancing conservation outcomes.
Enhances our understanding of geological and Earth-system processes
Enrol and vote in an election
Enter or exit full screen
Environmental Protection Authority
Eruera Prendergast-Tarena
Every 5 years is the general rule to review your will and
Every baby born in New Zealand must be registered, usually within 2 months of being born. You can order your baby's birth certificate and apply for their IRD number at the same time.
Examples and timelines for dealing with estates
Examples of a valid complaint include:
Examples of different levels of help for executors
Examples of support available:
Examples of topics covered by MBIE small-business websites
Examples of when an EPA for property might be helpful
Examples of when this EPA is helpful
Explore the Treaty of Waitangi
Export goods, animals or personal belongings
Faculty of Business and Economics
Faculty of Creative Arts and Industries.
Faculty of Education and Social Work
Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences
Fair trading, consumer rights and privacy
FairWay Resolution is a professional services firm that works with clients to prevent, manage, resolve and learn from conflict.
FairWay employs around 100 staff and contracts with over 110 specialist reviewers and dispute resolution practitioners (adjudicators, reviewers, mediators and conciliators) throughout New Zealand.
Fake celebrants and weddings
False claims about birth certificates:
Family Violence Death Review Committee
Family history, Te Reo, Treaty of Waitangi, military history
Family records in Australia
Family violence, mental health, addiction, separation, divorce, property, wills, sex changes.
Far North District Council
Fast seek to x% of the video
Feedback about the Govt.nz website
Feedback is important and is used to evaluate and improve the site.
Fences, driveways and drains
Fertility clinics hold additional information to what is in the
Fertility issues and assisted reproduction
File and serve your Family Court documents
File documents to a District Court
Filing documents with a Youth Court is the same as with a District Court.
Fill in all parts of the form, except the statutory declaration
Fill in all parts of the form, except the statutory declaration.
Fill out a Notice of Intended Marriage outside New Zealand form and return it to Births, Deaths and Marriages.
Fill out and submit the online form.
Film and Literature Board of Review
Financial Markets Authority
Financial help and benefits if you're over 65
Financial help and services
Financial help for caregivers
Financial help for first-home buyers
Financial help for people with a disability or illness
Financial help for your family
Financial help if someone dies
Financial service providers
Find a counsellor in your local area.
Find a job or list a vacancy
Find a notary public in New Zealand - New Zealand Society of Notaries
Find fertility clinics in your area
Find information about the visitor centre, education services, Parliamentary Information Service, Office of the Speaker, and media enquiries.
Find out about central and local government consultations happening across the country.
Find out about maternity care, getting a midwife, parental leave, antenatal classes, health tests and parenting support.
Find out about your choices for tests, care and treatment.
Find out how Apple supports inclusive use of Mac computers and portable devices like iPhone, iPad, Watch, TV and HomePod
Find out how to become a marriage and civil union celebrant in New Zealand, stay up to date with your registration, and access support and training.
Find out how to request an NZeTA (New Zealand electronic Travel Authority) and how much it costs. Allow 72 hours for your request to be processed.
Find out if you can get a visa to work in New Zealand. Your partner needs to have a work, student or Military visa or be a New Zealand citizen or resident.
Find out if you can get help to pay for home insulation and efficient, fixed heating options through the Warmer Kiwi Homes programme.
Find out if you can get money to help pay for your education.
Find out what a rates rebate is, if you qualify and how much you might get off your rates. See how and when to apply and download the application form.
Find out what is on a credit record, who can access your credit record, and your rights to change information on it.
Find out what to do and who to contact if you have a concern or complaint about your home support services.
Find out what to do when someone dies, and record, share and discuss your own end of life wishes.
Find out when your child can start school, how to choose a school, enrol and prepare your child for school.
Find out when your family came to NZ
Find out where your nearest Heartland Service Centre is:
Find out whether you can get government-funded pregnancy care and what services are included.
Find out who to contact to get free health advice for you and your family.
Find resources and courses for learning
Find your Member of Parliament (MP)
Find your local council by region
Finding and starting a job
Finding information about your adoption
Finding relatives in Australia
Finding your birth parents
Fines, penalties and losing your licence
Fire and Emergency New Zealand
Fire and Emergency New Zealand Act
First apply for parental leave from your employer, then apply for parental leave payments from Inland Revenue.
First certificate (paper or electronic apostille)
First, contact a fertility clinic
Follow these steps when you apply for New Zealand citizenship.
Font size is set in pixels
Food South Otago located at Otago University in Dunedin.
Food Standards Australia New Zealand
Food Waikato located near Hamilton
Food labels help you make informed choices about the products you buy.
FoodSouth located at Lincoln in Canterbury
For New Zealand passport applications and renewals, contact
For a paper apostille, the Department of Internal Affairs Authentication Unit will put a covering page, called an apostille certificate, on top of your documents. They will be tied together with a ribbon and get an official embossed seal.
For adults aged 16 or over it costs:
For an overseas civil union to be valid in NZ, the original civil union must have happened in:
For any donations made at a New Zealand fertility clinic on or after 22 August 2005 that resulted in a birth, changes must be made through the fertility clinic.
For any general or media enquires about:
For appeals from NZ, the Supreme Court of New Zealand replaces the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council located in London.
For applications relating to birth and adoption in Samoa, please be aware that these external checks are currently taking 6 to 8 months (in addition to the timeframe mentioned above).
For birth and marriage certificates, to register a death or related matters, contact the Department of Internal Affairs (
For births that happened at least 100 years ago, use:
For borders and lines, for example table grid lines, above accordions and promo tiles.
For business information on fair trading, regulated industries, competition, mergers and authorisations, contact the Commerce Commission.
For children aged 15 or under it costs:
For civil cases, they decide on claims of up to $200,000.
For complaints about privacy, contact the Office of the Privacy Commissioner.
For complaints about your bank, contact the Banking Ombudsman.
For current passport processing timeframes, visit the passports website.
For customs clearance to bring items into NZ, contact the NZ Customs Service and the Ministry for Primary Industries (
For customs clearance when you take items out of NZ, you may need to contact both the NZ Customs Service and the Ministry for Primary Industries (
For donations made before 22 August 2005 that resulted in a birth, complete the appropriate form below:
For donations made on or after 22 August 2005, the fertility clinic will have more details about the donor than the
For donor-conceived persons
For enquiries about a current application, email
For enquiries about applying for citizenship, email
For financial assistance if you've lost your job or are not working at the moment, contact Work and Income New Zealand.
For free health advice, treatment and information, call Healthline on
For general enquiries, email
For help starting a business in New Zealand, contact business.govt.nz.
For help to start and maintain your KiwiSaver savings scheme, contact Inland Revenue.
For help with a rates postponement or rebate, contact your local council.
For help with living expenses or to find emergency housing, contact Work and Income New Zealand (
For information about COVID-19 and the workplace for employees, employers and businesses, contact Employment NZ.
For information about employment rights and guidance on how to resolve your concerns, contact Employment New Zealand.
For information about the public housing landlord and urban development partner, contact
For information about your student loan, contact Inland Revenue (
For information and guides on tenancy rights and responsibilities, contact Tenancy Services.
For information on housing and urban development policy and support, contact the Ministry of Housing and Urban Development (
For more details, such as their main and additional roles, check the website for Fire and Emergency
For more information call the family justice help line on
For more information, see
For most people, your driver licence is valid for 10 years. The NZTA will send you a renewal reminder letter about 8 weeks before your photo driver licence is due to expire (if they have your current address).
For non-urgent applications, follow the standard process below.
For parents, the Ministry of Justice also has advice and resources for getting help for your children. These include:
For people using a keyboard rather than a mouse to navigate, Govt.nz:
For price concerns on essential products and services, contact the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (
For questions about citizenship by descent or getting proof of citizenship status, email
For questions about injuries, claims and payments, contact Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC).
For questions about workplace safety and regulations, contact WorkSafe.
For support when making employees redundant, contact Work and Income New Zealand (
For the first year of Best Start, it does not matter how much your family earns.
For the safe and legal disposal of your firearms, other arms items and ammunition, End of Life Service offers advice on leaving instructions:
For these donations, donors and donor-conceived people can choose to give their details to the voluntary register. The HART Register includes only the details they choose to provide. For this reason, requests for information from the voluntary register won't always result in the information desired.
For up to date, official advice for New Zealanders living and travelling overseas, see the Safe Travel website.
For visas in another country or territory, contact the local immigration authority.
Forest Stewardship Council
Forms and supporting documents
Foster parents (caregivers) look after children in many ways, from short-term or emergency care, to long-term or permanent arrangements.
Fostering a child (caregiving)
Franklin District Council.
Free access to government-sponsored websites
Free health checks for children under 14
Free health services for children
Free independent advocates are available to assist with the complaint process.
Free or subsidised maternity care
Freephone: 0800 22 52 12 (New Zealand only)
From 30 April 2024 we don't offer the All Blacks decorative birth certificate.
Funded by the Ministry of Health and provided by
Funding, services and support available to help children with disabilities and learning support needs to go to mainstream schools.
GNS Science exists to create a cleaner, safer, more prosperous future for
GNS undertakes research that:
Gender on the Driver Licence Register
Genders you can choose to show on your certificate
General Practice after-hours service
General identity declaration form
Gerardine Clifford-Lidstone
Get a New Zealand student visa
Get a civil union licence
Get a copy of a WW1 service record
Get a document translated into English so you can use it in NZ.
Get a marriage certificate
Get a marriage licence online
Get a non-disclosure direction
Get a record of a name change
Get a record of your name change
Get a translation to use in another country
Get a visa to visit another country
Get a warrant of fitness or certificate of fitness
Get an IRD number for a business, charity or trust
Get an IRD number for your child
Get an order to administer property
Get celebrant training, support and information
Get financial help with housing
Get help to find birth, death and marriage records
Get help with the costs of raising children with Working for Families tax credit payments. Your payments are worked out based on the information you give Inland Revenue about your income for the year.
Get information from them about local fishing and hunting:
Get information from them about local freshwater fishing and game bird hunting:
Get information in an emergency or disaster
Get or renew a New Zealand passport
Get proof you are a citizen
Get proof you are not a citizen
Get publicly funded health services
Get someone else's birth certificate
Get the documents translated by a government agency or court in the country that issued the documents.
Get the documents translated by a translation agency in New Zealand or send the Citizenship Office your original documents. If you do not have professional translations of your documents, the Citizenship Office will get in touch with you to arrange these, if required.
Get the documents translated by a translation agency in New Zealand, send the Citizenship Office your original documents. If you do not have professional translations of your documents, the Citizenship Office will get in touch with you to arrange these, if required.
Get your certificate and original documents
Get your child a New Zealand passport when born overseas
Get your child an NZ passport when born overseas
Get your information ready
Get yourself a New Zealand passport when born overseas
Getting NZ Superannuation or the Veteran's Pension
Getting New Zealand citizenship for a child born through an international surrogacy agreement involves multiple government agencies and processes. Your options are outlined in a fact sheet produced by DIA and the other agencies involved in international surrogacy matters.
Getting a New Zealand passport
Getting help with budgeting and finances
Getting help with your budget
Getting your car driver licence in New Zealand is a 3-step process. As you progress through the stages you gain a new licence with fewer requirements and more responsibilities.
Getting your documents back
Getting your documents translated
Gisborne District Council
Give all 3 of these documents to your celebrant before your wedding.
Giving up your NZ citizenship
Going back to work after your parental leave ends
Going to court as a witness
Government Chief Digital Officer
Government Chief Information Security Officer
Government Communications Security Bureau
Government Superannuation Appeals Board
Government Superannuation Fund Authority
Government Superannuation Fund Authority (GSFNZ)
Government Web Accessibility Standard
Government contact details
Government help is available to educate children with a physical disability or illness.
Government help with dental costs
Government services and tools
Government websites are also required to follow the Web Accessibility Standard, which includes making images accessible.
Government-grade login and verified identity services.
Govt.nz aims for good contrast between text and the background it appears on.
Govt.nz also defines how to select, name and style links.
Govt.nz current accessibility issues
Govt.nz displays up to 3 promo tiles in this area at any one time.
Govt.nz displays up to 6 promo tiles at any one time.
Govt.nz does not provide:
Govt.nz follows best-practice advice for online Government content.
Govt.nz follows best-practice advice on how to write for government digital channels.
Govt.nz follows the NZ Government Accessibility Guidelines for images.
Govt.nz has promo tiles on 2 sections of the home page to link to timely or new information.
Govt.nz is for people who need to interact with the NZ government in the course of their day-to-day lives including NZ citizens and residents, or people who want to move to or visit NZ.
Govt.nz is guided by the Strategy for a Digital Public Service, which provides new opportunities to support better public services by putting you at the centre of the design.
Govt.nz is here to make it easier for you to find and use government information and services online.
Govt.nz principles, vision and goals
Govt.nz puts you, the user, at the centre of everything.
Govt.nz uses a line height of 1.43 times the font size. Generous line height increases white space, making the page easier to read.
Govt.nz uses limited colours to add emphasis to the text or content elements they're applied to.
Govt.nz uses multiples of 6 pixels (px) to create consistent spacing. Usually a gap between a heading and paragraph is 36px.
Govt.nz uses the New Zealand government all-of-government brand in combination with the Coat of Arms. The Public Service Commission looks after the all-of-government brand.
Govt.nz uses the following styles, sizes and spacing for headings and paragraphs.
Govt.nz uses the font Fira Sans because it:
Grants funded by Lotto help to pay for equipment for disabled people who want to be more closely involved in their communities.
Greater Wellington Regional Council
Guardians of New Zealand Superannuation
Guide to finding shipping lists that are available online
Guide to researching NZ soldiers in the First World War
HK TST Chung King Woodhouse clothing shop JF81 Shibuya display on sale.JPG
Hague Convention adoptions and NZ citizenship
Hanmer Springs Thermal Pools and Spa
Hastings District Council
Have a plan ready in case you become unable to make decisions for yourself. Some health events can cause you to lose mental capacity.
Have your say on proposed amendments to waste legislation
Having a baby, marriage, divorce, bereavement, financial help
Health Quality and Safety Commission
Health Research Council of New Zealand
Health advice and services
Health and Disability Commissioner
Health services in your area
Health tests and screening
Healthcare and medical costs
Heartland Services (Heartlands) ensure rural and isolated communities receive access to the services and support they need from government and community services.
Heartland service centres provide advice and support free of charge, including access to:
Help children grieve and mourn their loss
Help for children with behaviour problems
Help for children with learning support needs
Help for partners staying at home
Help for victims of crime
Help from a carer and assistive equipment could make tasks such as showering, dressing and using a toilet much safer for you. Find out what government help you may qualify for.
Help paying for childcare
Help paying for early childhood education
Help with day-to-day personal care
Help with housing and paying rent
Help with mental health and addiction
Help with searching historical records
Her Excellency the Governor-General
Heritage New Zealand Pouhere Taonga
High Performance Sport NZ
High Performance Sport NZ (HPSNZ)
High Performance Sport NZ leads the high performance sports system in New Zealand.
Historical births, deaths and marriages
History, culture and heritage
Home repairs and maintenance
Horizons Regional Council
Horowhenua District Council
Hospital and specialist services
Housing and household costs
Housing, rates and renting
How Govt.nz uses colours, images and logos.
How a personal order works
How do I find out about correct etiquette at a
How long applications take, and help with the cost
How many annual holidays you get
How many people do you want to share in the responsibility of looking after your money, property and other assets. You can have 1 or more attorneys and the same applies for successor attorneys.
How much NZ Superannuation you get paid depends on whether you have a partner and your living arrangements.
How much a celebrant charges is up to them. You pay them directly.
How much debt do you have?
How telehealth services are supported
How to apply for Best Start
How to apply for NZ citizenship
How to apply for NZ citizenship by grant
How to apply for a visitor visa
How to apply if your child is 2 to 15 or was born outside NZ
How to apply if your child is under 2 and was born in NZ
How to change your details on the register
How to consent or cancel consent
How to enrol your child at school in NZ
How to file your documents
How to find out what parliamentary bills are open for public feedback and options for how to make a submission.
How to get divorced in NZ
How to get fertility treatment
How to have a civil union in NZ
How to make a submission on a bill
How to order a civil union certificate
How to order a name change certificate
How to pay the International Visitor Levy
How to register your baby
How to select, prepare and cook food safely.
How to send your feedback about the Govt.nz website
How to withdraw your application
How wills help you and your loved ones
Human Assisted Reproductive Technology Act 2004
Human Rights Review Tribunal
Human rights and freedoms
Hutt Valley District Health Board
IRD numbers, benefits, superannuation, SuperGold, KiwiSaver
IVF treatment to stimulate egg production
Identity Referee Declaration (PDF 113KB)
Identity referee or witness
If a loved one has died, you might be able to get help with the cost of the funeral, burial or cremation. You may also get help with living expenses or childcare.
If a parent or legal guardian is not able to sign the statutory declaration section of the form, you need to explain why. You also need to provide evidence if they are:
If all parents or guardians cannot sign
If any of your documents are not in English
If both parents can complete the form, or if one of the parents is unknown, you can register the birth online.
If both parents cannot complete the form
If colour has a meaning assigned to it, Govt.nz uses other methods to supplement this information. For example, a graph using colours also has text labels. For colour that has no meaning, like decorative text, or logos and brand names, accessibility guidelines are not necessarily followed.
If information about your donor or donor-conceived child is not available on the
If it deals with shared property:
If naming the other parent would put you or your baby in danger
If the Hague Convention applies, the adoption cannot be assessed under scenario 1.
If the Registrar-General decides it is not a valid complaint, they will let you know about other avenues of dispute resolution.
If the Registrar-General does not investigate the complaint
If the Registrar-General investigates the complaint
If the Registrar-General investigates the complaint, they will get information from the marriage or civil union celebrant and any available witnesses. A decision will be made based on the legislation and information gathered.
If the application is received less than 2 weeks before the anniversary, the congratulatory message may not be able to be sent in time for the event.
If the baby is going to be adopted
If the carer is not a parent of the child (non-parent carer), their income is not included in
If the claim to citizenship is through the father, you have to prove he is the father. So, both parents need to give consent for their information to be collected and used to verify the claim.
If the claim to citizenship is through the mother, the father does not have to sign the form. This is because you do not need to provide information about the father to verify who the mother is.
If the couple apply for a marriage licence, the Registrar of Marriages sends the objection to the Family Court. The court decides whether the objection is valid or not.
If the estate is worth less than $15,000, you may not need to apply to the High Court.
If the event is in January, you should apply no later than 7 December.
If the other parent cannot fill in the form
If the other parent has died, provide their death certificate.
If the other parent is known but cannot complete the form for any of the above reasons, you need to complete a PDF form and post it to Births, Deaths and Marriages (BDM).
If the person is still alive, you cannot get their records without their written approval.
If the underlying page remains accessible to screen readers, visually impaired users can accidentally navigate away from the Shielded Site widget while it remains visible on the screen. This can cause privacy issues, confusion and difficulty in navigating back to the widget.
If the witness does not have a New Zealand passport, they must be a:
If there are any issues with or disputes about an
If they are on the HART Register
If they do nothing within that time, the court will check your application, making sure it meets all the requirements, and make the dissolution order. The divorce will take effect 1 month after the dissolution order is made.
If they were born outside NZ
If you adopted your child outside New Zealand, talk to the Citizenship Office about what you need to do.
If you already have a name change application in progress, do not apply to update your sex marker until this has been registered by Births, Deaths and Marriages.
If you already have official English translations, provide these with your original documents.
If you also want to change your name
If you also want to update the sex marker on your New Zealand birth certificate, this is a different process to just changing your name. You can apply to change both using the same form.
If you also want to update the sex marker on your child's New Zealand birth certificate, this is a different process to just changing their name. You can apply to change both using the same form.
If you applied at the New Zealand High Commission
If you applied by post or at a DIA counter
If you apply on behalf of a child aged 15 or under, your application falls under
If you apply when your child is under 12 months old, you do not need to complete the family income section.
If you are 16 or 17 and are married, in a civil union or de facto relationship, you must complete an adult form.
If you are 16 or older, you need an adult passport. Adult passports cost $247 and are valid for 10 years.
If you are Deaf, hard of hearing, deaf-blind or speech-impaired, you can use the New Zealand Relay Service (NZ Relay) to contact us.
If you are a 16 or 17-year-old donor-conceived child
If you are a New Zealand citizen by birth or grant and have a child overseas, you can register them as a citizen by descent and get them a New Zealand passport.
If you are a New Zealand citizen by birth or grant, any children you have outside New Zealand are citizens by descent.
If you are a citizen by descent
If you are a citizen by descent and have a child outside New Zealand
If you are a citizen by descent you can travel on a New Zealand passport and are entitled to live and work in New Zealand. You mostly have the same rights as any New Zealand citizen.
If you are a citizen by descent, you may also be eligible to apply for citizenship by grant.
If you are a citizen by descent, you must register your citizenship before you can get a New Zealand passport.
If you are a citizen by descent, you need to register your citizenship to make it official and to get a passport.
If you are a citizen by descent, you:
If you are a medical practitioner
If you are aged 17 or under, you also must include statutory declarations from:
If you are already a New Zealand citizen
If you are applying due to marriage under eligibility criteria 2, you also need to provide your:
If you are applying for or registering your New Zealand citizenship, you can ask for your citizenship certificate to show your preferred gender.
If you are applying under eligibility criteria 3, you also need to provide the birth certificate of your parent who was born in Samoa on or after 13 May 1924 and before 1 January 1949.
If you are applying under eligibility criteria 4, you also need to provide:
If you are becoming a citizen of a country that does not allow dual citizenship, you might have to give up your New Zealand citizenship.
If you are not eligible for funding
If you are not happy with the resolution offered by your celebrant, church or approved organisation, you can make a complaint to the Registrar-General. Only refer the complaint to the Registrar-General if it meets the above criteria.
If you are not in contact with the other parent or they cannot fill in the form, talk to the Citizenship Office.
If you are not in contact with your parent or they cannot fill in the form, talk to the Citizenship Office.
If you are not satisfied with our response to any privacy-related concern you may have, you can contact the Privacy Commissioner and make a privacy complaint.
If you are not yet a New Zealand citizen
If you are the personal representative of someone who has died, you can apply to block public access to their records.
If you are the personal representative of someone who has died, you can find out who has requested their records. You will need to provide evidence that you are their personal representative (the executor, administrator or trustee of their estate).
If you are under 16, you apply for citizenship as a child.
If you are under 20, and intending to get married in the United Kingdom, you must also obtain consent from each of your parents.
If you arrive in NZ less than 3 days before your wedding
If you become a donor, you have to provide identity information to the fertility clinic, and this information will be included on the Human Assisted Reproductive Technology (HART) register if a child is born from your donation.
If you bring your application into a Department of Internal Affairs public counter, your original documents are copied, certified and given back to you straight away.
If you cannot afford to pay for a lawyer, you can apply for legal aid.
If you cannot get NZ Superannuation or other benefits
If you cannot get any other financial support from the government, you can apply for help with day-to-day living costs and health.
If you cannot manage your property yourself anymore and you do not have an
If you cannot solve a problem with a government agency, you can complain to the Ombudsman.
If you celebrate separately after your wedding, you cannot misrepresent that event as your legal wedding.
If you change your name again in the future, your new name and the name you provided in the process of changing registered sex will both be displayed on the birth certificate.
If you changed your name or were adopted
If you choose a formula assessment, the amount of child support depends on:
If you come to New Zealand on a holiday, you may need to get an NZeTA or a visitor visa.
If you come to New Zealand on a holiday, you might need to apply for a visitor visa before you arrive. Work out what you need to do to apply.
If you decide to move overseas you may be able to keep getting some or all of your NZ Super or Veteran's Pension.
If you decide to unregister and not participate in user research, contact the project team by emailing
If you did not get a letter to confirm your details or you have questions, contact
If you did not order a certificate, you will get a confirmation email.
If you disagree with the amount of child support, you may be able to ask for a review.
If you do need to apply by post or in person, go to
If you do not have a current passport, you can send another photo ID or a certified copy of your current driver licence. If you do not have a current photo ID, include a note with your application explaining why.
If you do not have a passport
If you do not have a photo ID, you must complete an identity referee declaration form:
If you do not have an acceptable photo ID, you must also complete a identity referee declaration. You must choose a referee we can contact to confirm your identity.
If you do not have an acceptable photo ID, you must complete an identity referee declaration form.
If you do not have official English translations, the DIA Translation Service can do this for you.
If you do not have official English translations, the DIA Translation Service can do this for you:
If you do not have your full birth certificate, you need to get it from the country where you were born.
If you do not know the year of a record you're looking for, you can ask Births, Deaths and Marriages to search for it.
If you do not know the year of the birth, death or marriage, you can ask Births, Deaths and Marriages to search their records. There may be an extra cost for this.
If you do not know the year of the birth, death, civil union, marriage or name change, you can pay for help.
If you do not know the year of the event
If you do not meet a requirement
If you do not meet the requirements for citizenship, you can withdraw the application and get a partial refund of NZD$136.30.
If you do not receive salary, wages or a benefit, you need to organise payments yourself.
If you find some parts you need or want to change, update your will and
If you get ACC payments and NZ Super
If you get NZ Superannuation or a Veteran's Pension, you'll get a SuperGold Card. Use it to get business discounts, free or discounted council services, and free off-peak travel on public transport.
If you got married or had a civil union in New Zealand and legally ended the relationship overseas through a divorce or dissolution, you can get this information added to your marriage or civil union certificate.
If you got married or had a civil union in New Zealand and you want to update your name on your marriage or civil union certificate, you can do this on your name change form.
If you had your baby with the help of a sperm or egg donor
If you have a deceased family member you think qualified for a medal they never claimed, their closest living relative can apply for it on their behalf.
If you have a disability or illness you might be able to get an allowance, subsidy or loan to help with your expenses. Financial assistance is available for all citizens.
If you have a low income, you may be able to get other payments and support in addition to your
If you have a partner (or had a partner in the last year), you need to give their:
If you have a privacy complaint about DIA
If you have a problem at work talk to your boss directly. If you cannot solve it you can get help from government and other organisations. Some of this help is free.
If you have a problem with a celebrant who is a minister of a church or approved organisation, you should contact the church or organisation directly about your complaint.
If you have a problem with your bank, insurance company or financial adviser, you can make a complaint.
If you have a problem with your celebrant, it's a good idea to talk to them first. Your celebrant will likely want to resolve any issues with you directly and use your feedback to improve their performance in future.
If you have a serious problem with a marriage or civil union celebrant not performing their legal duties before, during or after your ceremony, you can make a formal complaint about them.
If you have also requested a certificate with your new information, this will be sent to you by post or courier after the application is processed.
If you have an accident, serious illness or mental incapacity and become unable to make or communicate personal care or welfare decisions, this
If you have an outstanding bill, contact the company and try to arrange to pay it off. If this is not possible, you may be able to get some help.
If you have any concerns about how DIA manages your personal information, you may contact the DIA Privacy Officer with the details above.
If you have any questions about child support, contact
If you have any, do you want your children involved in your care?
If you have changed your gender identity
If you have changed your legal name
If you have changed your legal name, you must provide evidence of the name change, such as a marriage certificate or deed poll.
If you have ever changed your name outside New Zealand, include name change documents like a marriage or civil union certificate.
If you have lost or damaged your New Zealand birth certificate or your citizenship certificate, you can apply for a replacement or call to check your certificate number.
If you have lost your certificate
If you have lost your marriage or civil union certificate and you want to replace it, you must order a new certificate.
If you have questions about updating the sex marker on your birth certificate, contact the Births, Deaths and Marriages team:
If you have spoken with your celebrant and you are still unhappy, you can make a claim with the Disputes Tribunal for up to $30,000 for disputes about goods and services.
If you know someone in prison, you can support them by visiting, calling or writing to them.
If you live in Auckland, Wellington or Christchurch, you can make the booking online.
If you live in NZ or will arrive here more than 3 days before your wedding
If you live in New Zealand for at least 5 years, you can change your citizenship to become a citizen by grant.
If you lived or worked in another country you may be able to get their social security pension. When you apply for NZ Superannuation or the Veteran's Pension, apply for these pensions at the same time.
If you lived or worked overseas
If you lose your mental capacity your
If you need a New Zealand passport to travel immediately for an emergency, call the Passport Office to discuss your situation:
If you need a birth certificate to apply for a government benefit and you cannot afford the cost, Work and Income may be able to help.
If you need a civil union certificate
If you need a document translated into English or another language, you can organise the translation yourself or use the Department of Internal Affairs Translation Service.
If you need an accessible version of a
If you need health advice, call
If you need help from the police, the fire service, or you need an ambulance, dial 111 and the emergency operator will connect you to the right place.
If you need help paying your formula-assessed child support, you may be able to get assistance from Work and Income.
If you need more help or have questions about the information or services on this page, contact one of the following agencies.
If you need more help or have questions about the information or services on this page, contact the following agencies.
If you need more help or have questions about the information or services on this page, contact the following agency.
If you need more information, contact the Citizenship Office.
If you need to change or cancel the application, contact the Congratulatory Message Service as soon as possible.
If you need to get your document notarised, you must use a New Zealand notary public.
If you need to get your documents translated, the Department of Internal Affairs can do the translation as part of your application. Alternatively, you can organise your own translation.
If you need to travel in a hurry you can apply for an urgent passport. It costs $391 and is processed within 3 working days.
If you need to travel in a hurry you can apply to have your passport renewed urgently. It costs $494 and is processed within 3 working days.
If you need to travel in a hurry, you can apply for an urgent passport for $494. We aim to process applications for urgent processing within 3 working days, but this can depend on demand and factors such as complete information and a photo that meets the standards.
If you need to travel urgently
If you need your document notarised
If you need your document translated
If you or someone you care about is the victim of a crime, there's support and help available.
If you ordered a new birth certificate or name change certificate for your child, this will be posted to you.
If you ordered a new birth certificate or name change certificate, this will be posted to you.
If you organise your own translation, you need to get it notarised by a New Zealand notary public.
If you own a house, you can get people to occupy the spare bedrooms and help with the bills.
If you own your own home, many councils let you postpone or defer paying your rates. Check with your council to find out if they offer this service and whether you are eligible.
If you plan to leave within 6 months, apply for a Marriage Visitor Visa.
If you post or courier your application, the Citizenship Office couriers your original documents to you with your citizenship certificate and passport, if you applied for one.
If you prefer to apply by post, contact the Congratulatory Message Service team who can email or post you a PDF of the printed form.
If you provide feedback by email, that feedback is sent to appropriate Department of Internal Affairs (DIA) staff. We may pass on relevant comments to other people within DIA who administer or contribute content to the site. This could include your email address and other identifying information that you have provided.
If you provide personal information, it is held securely by DIA and will not be retained once the insights have been documented and is no longer needed.
If you refuse to be the executor
If you start or stop work, remember that you may need to change the tax code you use for any other sources of income, such as NZ Superannuation, investments or another job.
If you still cannot agree after completing the course and mediation, you can apply to the Family Court to make a custody order.
If you submit a survey or feedback form to us, it will be sent to appropriate public sector staff.
If you think a TV or radio programme hasn't followed the broadcasting standards, or an ad (on TV, radio, the internet or in print) hasn't followed the advertising standards, you can complain to the relevant authorities.
If you think that public access to your birth, marriage, civil union or name change records would put you or your family in danger, you can apply for a non-disclosure direction, which would block public access to your records.
If you visa has expired, is about to expire or you have questions about the conditions about your visa, contact Immigration NZ (
If you visit your doctor more than 12 times in a year, talk to your doctor about the High Use Health Card to lower the cost of the visits.
If you want a birth certificate for your new baby
If you want to get a driver licence in your new name, you have to apply in person.
If you want to update a sex marker and also change a name, you must provide proof of your identity in the community.
If you want to use the paper form instead
If you want to use your birth certificate outside New Zealand
If you want your child to be a New Zealand citizen, you have 2 options:
If you were adopted outside New Zealand, talk to the Citizenship Office about what you need to do.
If you were born before 1972
If you were born before 1978
If you were born in New Zealand and you're adopted, once you turn 20 you can request your pre-adoptive birth certificate and information about your adoption records held by Oranga Tamariki.
If you were born in New Zealand before 1 January 2006
If you were born in New Zealand on or after 1 January 2006
If you were born in New Zealand or have been granted citizenship, you can register your child as a New Zealand citizen by descent and get them a New Zealand passport.
If you were born in Samoa before 1 January 1949, apply here:
If you were born on or after 1 January 1949, apply here:
If you were born or married overseas, we will ask you to submit supporting documents, if you have them.
If you were born outside NZ
If you were born outside New Zealand
If you were born outside New Zealand and adopted in the Cook Islands, Niue or Tokelau, you may not be a New Zealand citizen. For advice on this, contact the Citizenship Office below.
If you were born overseas
If you were born overseas and at least 1 of your parents was a New Zealand citizen by birth or grant when you were born, you are a New Zealand citizen by descent.
If you were born overseas and at least 1 of your parents was a New Zealand citizen by birth or grant when you were born, you can register as a citizen by descent and get a New Zealand passport.
If you work in government and want to add information about your services to Govt.nz, contact the Govt.nz team.
If you work in government, this guide helps you work out if your information and services should be on this site.
If you would like to deliver your application in person, you must make an appointment at one of our offices in New Zealand:
If you're 16 or 17 and only want to update your sex marker:
If you're 16 or 17, want to change your name, and have your legal guardian's consent to change your name:
If you're a guardian applying on behalf of a child
If you're a parent or guardian of a child aged 15 or under who wants to update the sex marker on their birth certificate, you can apply on their behalf.
If you're aged 16 or over
If you're aged 18 or over and also want to change your name:
If you're aged 18 or over and only want to update your sex marker:
If you're an adult, your application falls under
If you're applying alone or an additional guardian appointed by the Family Court, you may also need to provide evidence of your guardianship status. There's more information about this on the application form.
If you're applying alone or you're an additional guardian appointed by the Family Court, you may also need to provide evidence of your guardianship status. There's more information about this on the application form.
If you're away from NZ for 26 weeks or less, you may still receive your NZ Superannuation or Veteran's Pension.
If you're being harassed by someone you're not in a relationship with, you can apply for a restraining order.
If you're calling from overseas:
If you're enrolled to vote, you can be asked to serve on a jury once every 2 years.
If you're having problems with a dog, you can speak to the dog's owner. Otherwise you can speak to your local council.
If you're intersex and want to change the sex recorded on your birth certificate to 'indeterminate', use the process for correcting errors in birth registration.
If you're travelling outside New Zealand and someone who is travelling with you dies, contact the nearest NZ embassy or Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade office.
If you're worried a child is being abused, please report your suspicions so authorities can investigate.
If you've bought a vehicle and something goes wrong, your rights depend on if you bought it from a motor vehicle trader or privately.
If you've retired on a limited income, you may be able to get government help to pay for regular costs or unexpected expenses. You can use your SuperGold Card for transport and other discounts.
If your adoptive parents were not NZ citizens
If your application is declined because you do not have a claim to New Zealand citizenship by descent, the Citizenship Office emails you or sends you a letter. You may not get a refund.
If your application is declined because your child does not have a claim to New Zealand citizenship by descent, the Citizenship Office emails you or sends you a letter. You may not get a refund.
If your application is declined, the Citizenship Office sends you a letter and includes your original documents.
If your application is successful, you are couriered your citizenship certificate and passport, if you applied for one.
If your application is successful, you will receive a full refund.
If your baby was born outside New Zealand
If your baby was stillborn or has died
If your birth was registered in New Zealand and you currently live overseas, you can still apply using this process. You must complete a statutory declaration with an authorised person in your country, and send the completed application to your nearest Department of Internal Affairs office.
If your birth was registered outside New Zealand and you want to make changes to your overseas birth certificate, you need to seek advice from your country of birth.
If your celebrant is a member of Celebrants Aotearoa
If your celebrant is a member of Celebrants Aotearoa, you can also contact them about your complaint.
If your celebrant is a minister or leader of an approved organisation
If your child has changed their gender identity
If your child is 15 or under and wants to update the sex marker on their birth certificate:
If your child is 15 or under, wants to update the sex marker on their birth certificate, and wants to change their name:
If your child is 2 to 18 or was born outside NZ
If your child is aged 16 or over:
If your child is under 2 and was born in NZ
If your child was adopted outside New Zealand
If your child was born as a result of a sperm or egg donation, you can update their name on the Human Assisted Reproductive Technology (HART) register at the same time as the name change, see:
If your child was born outside New Zealand
If your child was born outside New Zealand, you must also provide documents that show when and where they were born, and that they are a New Zealand citizen or entitled to live here indefinitely.
If your claim to New Zealand citizenship is through your father
If your claim to New Zealand citizenship is through your mother
If your complaint is about a celebrant who is a minister of a church or other approved organisation, the Registrar-General will contact the church or organisation about the complaint as well as the celebrant.
If your contributions to the site include material in which copyright or other intellectual property is owned by a third party, you warrant that you have the right to use that material and to grant the licence referred to in, and on the terms of, the clause above.
If your documents are being apostilled
If your documents are being authenticated
If your documents are not in English
If your expense is not listed, talk to Work and Income to discuss your situation and find out how they can help you.
If your feedback is not about the Govt.nz website
If your gender is different to the one on your birth certificate, you can ask for your citizenship certificate to show your new gender (if you have not yet applied for citizenship), or request an evidentiary certificate (if you have been granted citizenship).
If your income or the property value is higher, you need to apply for a property manager
If your mental capacity improves, your need for this
If your money is likely to be tied up until after probate and other estate tasks, setting up a prepaid funeral trust might be an option.
If your parent cannot fill in the form
If your parent cannot sign the form because they have died, you need to provide a death certificate.
If your parent has died, provide their death certificate.
If your partner moves into a rest home or hospital, you can get financial help to stay in your home, look after your own health and visit your partner.
If your relationship ends, you need to try to resolve child custody arrangements yourselves before you can go to court.
If your situation changes
If your translations are not acceptable, the Births, Deaths and Marriages Office will contact you.
If your wedding may have been performed by someone pretending to be a registered marriage or civil union celebrant, you should make a complaint to the Registrar-General.
Images and text: Zero Data (
Images on the website include feature images, graphs, infographics and icons.
Immigration Advisers Authority
Immigration New Zealand confirmation of visa / permit status.
Immigration New Zealand confirmation of visa/permit status.
Immigration and Protection Tribunal
Immunisation Advisory Centre
Immunisation protects people from many serious diseases. It can also stop some diseases from spreading within your family and the community.
Immunise your child for free
Import goods, animals or personal belongings
Improve the acceptance of hunting as a safe and legitimate activity, and game animals as valued introduced species.
In addition to a small head office,
In addition to the registration and passport application fees, you must also pay for the cost of courier delivery. The amount you need to pay will depend on your current location.
In criminal cases they cover minor offences, but can also conduct trials for some serious offences, such as rape and aggravated robbery.
In front of an authorised witness (for example, a Justice of the Peace), you must:
In general, you can take annual holidays at any time that is agreed between you and your employer.
In rare cases, the Minister of Internal Affairs might grant New Zealand citizenship to someone who does not meet all the requirements.
In rare circumstances, the Minister of Internal Affairs can take away your New Zealand citizenship. You will no longer be able to use a New Zealand passport and you might not be allowed to live here.
In the worst cases, uncertainties about your end-of-life wishes and estate can harm relationships within your family.
In your application you can select either:
In-depth resources for making a will
Include related documents or items to be sent overseas
Include these 2 documents with your New Zealand citizenship application:
Increase or decrease volume by 10%
Independent Crown entities
Independent Police Conduct Authority
Industrial and provident societies
Information about Dependent Child Resident Visa
Information and links for parents and caregivers.
Information and services are included on Govt.nz if there is evidence that users need help to:
Information for before and after birth:
Information for marriage celebrants
Information gathered in user research can be from:
Information held only by fertility clinics
Information to help beneficiaries: timeline and roles
Information you need to provide
Infracom was formed by legislation on
Infrastructure Commission
Infrastructure Commission (InC)
Inland Revenue Department
Inland Revenue has more information about eligibility for Best Start, which is 1 of 4 types of Working for Families payments.
Inland Revenue tax number
Insolvency and Trustee Service
Instead, you can order a printout. A printout is a copy of the information on the death record. It is not an official document.
Instructions are available to help you make the content larger:
Insulation and energy efficiency
Integrity Sport and Recreation Commission
Intellectual Property Office of New Zealand
Interim New Zealand Health Plan
International Accreditation New Zealand
International Antarctic Centre
International students in New Zealand may be able to work while on a student visa. Your eVisa or visa sticker in your passport shows whether you can work.
International surrogacy and citizenship
Intersex conditions are sometimes known as differences in sex development (DSD).
Invercargill City Council
Investigate a potential error on a record
Investment decisions will be made by the fund itself, according to its kaupapa and investment strategy, which will be developed by the independent board.
Is all your property relationship property, or is some just in your name?
Issues with your attorneys
It also performs independent audits for the Accident Compensation Corporation.
It can take up to 6 months to handle simple estates.
It costs $170 to change your name.
It costs $26.30 for a replacement photo driver licence.
It costs $55 to lodge a caveat or objection.
It expires after 3 months.
It helps people find new government information, services and tools. Govt.nz provides a short-term link to new services from a tile on its home page so people can help with trials and give feedback.
It helps users to contact government. Govt.nz provides a directory listing of government organisations so that users can find:
It is an offence under the Marriage Act 1955 and Civil Union Act 2004 to willingly and knowingly pretend to be a registered marriage or civil union celebrant and perform a wedding.
It makes it easier for users to:
It may be shared with third-party contractors to the extent necessary for them to administer or work on the site, or to work on special projects with us.
It pays to plan for your retirement as early as possible.
It should reduce your legal costs, if you make some decisions before you get legal advice.
It takes 3 to 14 months to find out if your application to become a New Zealand citizen has been approved.
It takes between 3 and 5 weeks for the certificate to be sent to you.
It was set up on 1 October 2018 to address homelessness, make housing affordable and cities more liveable.
It's the little things...
Its learning advisors, teachers and in-region staff work with students, their whanau and communities to help students achieve their educational and personal goals.
Jobseeker Support Student Hardship.
Joining KiwiSaver when you start work
Jurisdiction of District Courts
Just make sure data is turned on and visit
Kapiti Coast District Council
Kaunihera Taiao ki Waitaha
Keeping a vehicle on the road
Keeping baby safe during pregnancy:
Keyboard shortcuts for YouTube videos
Keyboard shortcuts when watching or listening to media
Kiwi Access Card or overseas proof of age card.
KiwiRail Holdings Limited
KiwiSaver withdrawals after you turn 65
Know your rights when a debt collector demands payment or takes your stuff because you cannot pay your bills.
Kupu Taurangi Hauora o Aotearoa
Kurow Duntroon Irrigation Company Limited
LDAC Secretary (Legal and Policy Adviser)
Lakes District Health Board
Land Information New Zealand
Landcare Research New Zealand Limited
Language Act 2016 created a partnership between
Language Strategy. One of the goals of the strategy is to have 1 million speakers of basic
Language petition, with over 30,000 signatures was delivered to Parliament. The petition led to many changes for the revitalisation of
Latin America and the Caribbean
Leadership Development Centre
Leadership Development Centre (LDC)
Leadership and focus on improving the lives of disabled people
Learn about built-in accessibility tools and features in Microsoft Technologies like Windows
Learn about moving into a rest home or hospital. Find out what to do when you need to move in urgently or need to transfer to another care facility.
Learn about the house buying process. Work out what you can afford before you start looking at properties.
Learn about where, what and how you can safely hunt on public conservation land in NZ.
Learn more about creating an
Learn more about self-identification
Learn what's on a name change certificate and what you can use one for. Order a name change certificate online, by phone, post, or in person.
Learning support (special education)
Lease or tenancy agreements
Leaving children by themselves
Legal Services Commissioner
Legal help when being harassed
Legends relating to different areas of NZ
Legislation Design and Advisory Committee
Level 1, Harbour City Centre
Level 2, 10 Brandon Street,
Level 2, 110 Featherston Street
Level 6, 155 Fanshawe Street
Liabilities of the estate
Licences, registration, fines, tickets, buying, selling, WOF, car seat
Limited Partnerships (New Zealand and overseas)
Links are designed to be accessible and helpful to users. This includes:
List of apostille and authentication countries
List of embassies (Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade website)
List of embassies - Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade
Living overseas for a few months
Local Government Commission
Lottery grants for disabled people
MIT Kolmar, Papatoetoe, School of Sport
MIT Mangere - home to their School of Plumbing, Gasfitting and Drainlaying
MIT Otara - the main campus
MPI is focused on the success of the primary industries for the benefit of all New Zealanders. Through their work they aim to:
Mackenzie District Council
Main points to know about Best Start
Maintaining your house and garden
Make a claim with the Disputes Tribunal
Make a complaint about a celebrant (PDF 178KB)
Make a complaint about a celebrant accessible alternative (TXT 2.8KB)
Make a complaint about food poisoning
Make a complaint about residential care
Make a complaint if you have a problem with your electricity, gas, water, phone, internet or an issue with access to shared property for broadband installations.
Make content on a web page larger
Make sure the family and guardians have information about the:
Make sure you do this before you leave New Zealand, or you may need to return to NZ if the overseas authorities require that a notice of intended marriage is lodged here.
Make sure you safely and legally dispose of any firearms, other arms items and ammunition.
Make sure your mobile data is turned on before you visit Zero Data.
Make sure your personal care and welfare
Make sure your rental agreement lets you have another person living there. If it does not, you can talk to your landlord about changing the agreement to include another person.
Make the NZ government logo accessible
Making a statutory declaration
Making the site easy to use
Manage your money in retirement
Manager, Education Workforce
Managing your money in retirement
Manawatu District Council
Manawatu-Whanganui family services
Mandatory registrations are for any donations made at a New Zealand fertility clinic on or after 22 August 2005 that result in a birth. The mandatory register includes:
Manukau Institute of Technology
Many NZ families originated in Europe, but they might have emigrated to Australia first.
Many places across New Zealand offer courses, some are free and some have fees. Courses are available for beginner, intermediate and advanced learners.
Marlborough District Council
Marlborough family services
Marriage licence application form
Marriages and civil unions in the UK
Masterton District Council
Matamata-Piako District Council
Mediation run by a family dispute resolution service provider
Medical practitioners who can prove they need information from the HART register to provide medical treatment or advice can get full access to someone's registered records.
Meet with a staff member who:
Mental Health and Wellbeing Commission
Mental capacity or incapacity
Mental health and addictions
Mercury NZ Ltd is an electricity generator and energy retailer.
Messages are posted to the person or couple 10 days before their birthday or wedding anniversary.
MidCentral District Health Board
Mike Brebner, Flickr, December 2017
Milford Sound, New Zealand
Military history, records and medals
Minister Responsible for Ministerial Services
Minister Responsible for RMA Reform
Minister Responsible for the GCSB
Minister Responsible for the NCSC
Minister Responsible for the NZSIS
Minister for Arts, Culture and Heritage
Minister for Building and Construction
Minister for Child Poverty Reduction
Minister for Digitising Government
Minister for Disability Issues
Minister for Economic Development
Minister for Emergency Management and Recovery
Minister for Ethnic Communities
Minister for Hunting and Fishing
Minister for Infrastructure
Minister for Land Information
Minister for Media and Communications
Minister for Mental Health
Minister for National Security and Intelligence
Minister for Oceans and Fisheries
Minister for Pacific Peoples
Minister for Regional Development
Minister for Rural Communities
Minister for Small Business and Manufacturing
Minister for Social Development and Employment
Minister for Social Investment
Minister for Sport and Recreation
Minister for State Owned Enterprises
Minister for Tourism and Hospitality
Minister for Trade and Investment
Minister for Treaty of Waitangi Negotiations
Minister for Universities
Minister for Vocational Education
Minister for Workplace Relations and Safety
Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector
Minister for the Environment
Minister for the Public Service
Minister of Climate Change
Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs
Minister of Foreign Affairs
Minister of Internal Affairs
Minister of Local Government
Minister of Science, Innovation and Technology
Minister of State for Trade
Ministry for Culture and Heritage
Ministry for Ethnic Communities
Ministry for Pacific Peoples
Ministry for Primary Industries
Ministry for the Environment
Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment
Ministry of Disabled People
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade
Ministry of Housing and Urban Development
Ministry of Social Development
Ministry of Youth Development
Mixed ownership model companies
Monday to Friday, 9am to 5.30pm
More about Have your say on proposed amendments to waste legislation
More about Mutual transactions of associations (including clubs and societies)
More about the proposed product stewardship regulations for agrichemicals, their containers, and farm plastics
More help with WW1 research
More information about eligibility
More information about inheritance
More information about the Youth Court
More information and contact details
More information and support
More information: wills and preparing financially
More specific authority for property includes when you, for example:
More support and information about health
Most NZ citizens can visit, live and work in Australia without applying for a tourist or work visa. NZ permanent residents need to apply for visas to Australia.
Most New Zealanders over 65 can get
Most New Zealanders over 65 can get NZ Super. For lower incomes, you may also be able to get government help to pay for regular costs or unexpected expenses.
Most New Zealanders will be able to get
Most of the government's $3 billion Provincial Growth Fund (PGF) has been fully allocated, as a result of the government reset of PGF funding to help the country recover from the economic impact of COVID-19.
Most of the museum is free, only some short term exhibitions have entry fees.
Most overseas marriages are valid in New Zealand. Your marriage will be registered in the country where it takes place.
Most overseas people who are not residents cannot buy homes here. Certain overseas people can apply for OIO consent to buy one home and live in it.
Most people can get a marriage licence. Same-sex marriages are legal in New Zealand.
Most people can order a death certificate by phone. You can pay by credit or debit card.
Most people can order a marriage certificate by phone. You can pay by credit or debit card.
Most people get NZ Superannuation when they turn 65, but there are other sources of income you might use to support yourself.
Most people get NZ Superannuation when they turn 65, but there are other sources of income you might use to support yourself. These can affect the tax you pay or benefits you can apply for.
Most people get their certificates in 1 to 2 weeks.
Most people get their certificates in 1-2 weeks.
Most people get their certificates within 2 weeks.
Most people visiting New Zealand for a short period of time must pay the NZD$100 International Visitor Conservation and Tourism Levy (IVL).
Most people will not be affected, but some people may find their record is not in their preferred surname and needs to be amended.
Most students must renew their student visa every year. You can do this online or complete a paper form.
Motivation to plan for retirement
Motor Vehicle Traders Register
Motor vehicle registration
Moving into residential care
Moving or travelling overseas
Moving overseas if you get NZ Superannuation or the Veteran's Pension
Moving to Australia, working overseas, emergency help
Multi-generation family walking on winter beach with dog
Mum and daughter planting
Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa
Mute or unmute video volume
NEMA is an autonomous departmental agency, hosted by the
NEMA was established on 1 December 2019, replacing the Ministry of Civil Defence & Emergency Management.
NEMA works with central and local government, communities, iwi, and business to make sure responses to and recoveries from emergencies are effective and integrated.
NZ Government Web Accessibility Standard 1.1
NZ Government, consultations, voting, Parliament, complaints
NZ Growth Capital Partners
NZ Growth Capital Partners (NZGCP)
NZ On Air is an independent government funding agency delivering quality and diverse New Zealand public media.
NZ Passport application and renewal
NZ Superannuation is a universal payment for New Zealand citizens and residents who are 65 or older.
NZ certificate of identity (issued under the Passports Act 1992 or the Immigration Act 2009)
NZ citizenship if you are adopted
NZ emergency travel document
NZ government logo markup
NZ refugee travel document
NZ screen talent is identified, developed and connected
NZ stories are seen and valued here and overseas.
NZ's leading certifier of quality, environmental and occupational health and safety management systems.
NZCER is a not-for-profit organisation with 3 strategic priorities:
NZCER is an independent research and development organisation which carries out and disseminate education research, and provide independent information, advice, and assistance.
NZD$204.40 to register your citizenship
NZD$348.40 to register your citizenship and get a passport.
NZD$451.40 to register your citizenship and get a passport.
NZGIF is not a funding agency and does not accept applications for funding or grants.
NZTE helps New Zealand businesses grow internationally.
National Advisory Council on the Employment of Women
National Care Standards Regulations
National Cyber Security Centre
National Emergency Management Agency
National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research Limited
National Library of New Zealand
National Museum of the Royal New Zealand Navy
National Organised Crime Group
National Pacific Radio Trust
Natural Hazards Commission
Natural Hazards Commission (NHC)
Navigate our website with browser functions, assistive technology, keyboard shortcuts and more.
Nearly all Govt.nz content is licensed under Creative Commons. This means you must make it clear that any content you use comes from the Govt.nz website and is owned by the Crown.
Neighbours should share the costs for fences and shared driveways. You may share the costs for some drains.
Nelson / Marlborough Fish and Game Council
Nelson Marlborough District Health Board
Nelson-Marlborough Institute of Technology
Network for Learning Limited
Network for Learning Limited (N4L)
New Plymouth District Council
New Zealand (visits by appointment only)
New Zealand Aid Programme
New Zealand Blood Service
New Zealand Broadcasting School
New Zealand Council for Educational Research
New Zealand Customs Service
New Zealand Debt Management Office
New Zealand Defence Force
New Zealand Export Credit Office
New Zealand Film Commission
New Zealand Fish and Game Council
New Zealand Food Innovation Network
New Zealand Food Innovation Network (NZFIN)
New Zealand Food Innovation Network is a national network of facilities and in-depth knoweldge around supporting the growth and development of New Zealand food & beverage business of all sizes.
New Zealand Game Bird Habitat Trust Board
New Zealand Geographic Board
New Zealand Government Property Corporation
New Zealand Green Investment Finance Limited
New Zealand Green Investment Finance Limited (NZGIF)
New Zealand Green Investment Finance Ltd (NZGIF) is a green investment bank established with the purpose of accelerating investment to lower greenhouse gas emissions activities in New Zealand.
New Zealand High Commission
New Zealand Infrastructure Commission
New Zealand Lotteries Commission
New Zealand Lottery Grants Board
New Zealand Parole Board (NZPB)
New Zealand Petroleum & Minerals
New Zealand Productivity Commission
New Zealand Qualifications Authority
New Zealand Railways Corporation
New Zealand Railways Corporation (NZRC)
New Zealand Security Intelligence Service
New Zealand Superannuation and the Veteran's Pension
New Zealand Symphony Orchestra
New Zealand Tax concept annual tax return IR10 form with coins and flag
New Zealand Telehealth Services
New Zealand Tourism Board
New Zealand Trade and Enterprise
New Zealand Trade and Enterprise (NZTE)
New Zealand Transport Agency
New Zealand achieve the social, cultural and economic benefits of international education.
New Zealand apprenticeships
New Zealand birth certificates are a record of birth. You can order a birth certificate online. It costs $33 for a standard certificate.
New Zealand birth certificates:
New Zealand birth, death, marriage, civil union and name change certificates are public records. In most cases, they can be ordered by anyone.
New Zealand certificate of identity or refugee travel document issued under the Passports Act 1992, with a letter or valid resident permit / visa from Immigration New Zealand confirming resident status
New Zealand citizen by birth or grant
New Zealand citizenship certificate
New Zealand citizenship certificate and a birth certificate
New Zealand has special arrangements with some countries to let their citizens work here. Some visas recognise your skills and experience, while others let you learn out about our lifestyle and culture.
New Zealand passport and a birth certificate
New Zealand's resilience to natural hazards
New Zealand. They do this by providing trusted cyber-security services.
New organisations and previous DHBs
New self-identification process
Nga Pirihimana O Aotearoa
No Asset Procedures (NAP)
No action required or, on further investigation, this is not a complaint the Registrar-General has jurisdiction over. They will let you know about other avenues of dispute resolution.
No action required: the celebrant is not at fault.
No later than Friday 19 December
Non-Public Service departments
Non-disclosure directions
North Canterbury Fish and Game Council
Northland District Health Board
Northland Fish and Game Council
Northland Regional Council
Northland family services
Not returning to your job from parental leave
Not safe to talk? Stay on the line.
Notice of Objection (PDF 156KB)
Notice of intended marriage form BDM 60 (PDF 229KB)
Notice of intended marriage form BDM60 (PDF 229KB)
Notice of intended marriage outside NZ BDM 57 (PDF 144KB)
Notice of intended marriage where parties are ordinarily resident outside NZ form BDM58 (PDF 369KB)
Notice of intended marriage where parties are ordinarily resident outside form BDM 58 (PDF 367KB)
Notification of birth for registration of child born in New Zealand form BDM 27 (PDF 733KB)
Notification of birth for registration of child born in New Zealand form BDM 27 accessible alternative (TXT 48KB)
Nursing and medical help at home
Observations, quotes, and insights may be used by DIA and shared with other government agencies for research purposes.
Off-peak travel is normally:
Office of Film and Literature Classification
Office of Human Rights Proceedings
Office of the Auditor-General
Office of the Clerk of the House of Representatives
On 15 June 2023, a new self-identification process replaced the Family Court process. Under the new process, applications are received directly by Births, Deaths, and Marriages.
On the back of 1 of your photos, they must:
Once given probate or the letter of administration for the estate, you can start to administer it.
Once people conceived from donated embryos or cells are aged 18 years they may consent to contact by their donor.
Once successful, dealing with the estate depends on how simple or complex it is.
Once the order takes effect:
Once you are a citizen, you can apply for your New Zealand passport. This is a separate process.
Once you have received your citizenship certificate, you can apply for a New Zealand passport. This is a separate process.
Once you know the child is eligible, check the other criteria to see if you can get child support for the child.
Once you turn 16, you apply for citizenship as an adult.
Once you're registered as a celebrant, you need to keep your details up to date.
Once you're registered as a celebrant, you need to renew your registration each year.
Once your New Zealand citizenship is approved, you need to attend a citizenship ceremony.
Only Good Friday and Easter Monday are public holidays. Easter Sunday is not a public holiday, and shops can choose to open if their local council lets them.
Only one of you needs to complete the application, but you need information about both of you.
Only registered celebrants can perform weddings or civil unions in New Zealand.
Only the DIA project team administering the research has access to your registration details.
Only the project team involved in the research has access to the results of the user research data.
Only the unique aspects of an
Open Polytechnic of New Zealand
Options for burial or cremation
Options that might be available to you
Oranga Tamariki-Ministry for Children
Order a birth certificate
Order a birth certificate online
Order a marriage certificate
Order a marriage certificate online
Order a new birth certificate to prove their name has changed. This will show their new name and all their previously registered names.
Order a new birth certificate to prove you have changed your name. This will show your new name and all your previously registered names.
Order by post using the paper application form
Order by post using the paper form
Ordinary power of attorney (
Ordinary power of attorney (POA) and enduring power of attorney (EPA or EPOA) are often mistaken for being the same but they have some important differences.
Ordinary power of attorney versus enduring power of attorney
Organisational celebrants can legally perform marriages in New Zealand for an approved church or organisation.
Organise your digital accounts
Otago Fish and Game Council
Other help and payments you may be able to get
Other options for finding a will
Other options for free access to internet
Other responsibilities for the executor or administrator
Other than personal information, which is covered under the Privacy Policy, any material you transmit or post to the site is considered non-confidential. This includes feedback or submissions you provide.
Other urgent or unexpected costs
Other ways to contact Work and Income
Other ways to work or volunteer at Fire and Emergency
Otherwise, you can check most government websites and contact information using Zero Data.
Otherwise, your parent or guardian can apply for you.
Otorohanga District Council
Outdoor Access Commission
Outside of the estate, the executor or administrator needs to:
Overseas Investment Office
Overseas marriages are valid in NZ
Ownership of the images is listed with the copyright information.
Pacific Cooperation Foundation
Pacific Radiology Building
Paid parental leave: Contact
Palmerston North City Council
Papakura District Council
Parental leave is the leave you apply to your employer for so that you do not have to work once you have your baby.
Parliamentary Commissioner for the Environment
Parliamentary Counsel Office
Parliamentary Under-Secretary to the Minister Responsible for RMA Reform
Parliamentary Under-Secretary to the Minister for Infrastructure
Parliamentary Under-Secretary to the Minister for Media and Communications
Partnerships have created a growing network of over 5,000 protected areas, ranging from small backyard patches to huge swathes of high country.
Passport expiry and transit requirements
Passports and visas when you go to Australia
Passports, citizenship and identity
Paul Sutherland Photography,
Pay a speeding ticket or traffic infringement
Pay fines from speeding, parking, safety cameras or other tickets
Pay for your apostille or authentication
Pay the organisation that sent you the fine or ticket. Check how to pay online, what happens if you do not pay on time, and how to dispute them.
Paying back your student loan
Paying for home insulation
Paying for residential care
Paying for visits to doctors
Paying tax if you come to work in NZ
Payments for child support
Payments for young people aged 16 or 17 who cannot live with their parents, and for young parents aged 16 to 19.
Payments start when your parental leave payments end.
People conceived from donated embryos or cells and/or their parents/guardians may agree to identifying information being released to people conceived from the same donor.
People conceived from donations made on or after 22 August 2005 can find out the identity of their donor.
People do not have to make a will.
People seeking work and employers looking for staff can connect on the following websites:
Performing a marriage or civil union ceremony
Perinatal and Maternal Mortality Review Committee
Perioperative Mortality Review Committee
Permanent residency and citizenship for NZers in Australia
Personal Property Securities Register
Personal care and welfare
Personal care and welfare enduring power of attorney
Personal orders are made by the family court on behalf of people who are either completely or partly unable to:
Personal orders are used when specific actions must be taken on your behalf.
Personal orders by the family court
Personal orders can be applied for by:
Personal property securities
Pharmaceutical Management Agency, PHARMAC
Phone 0800 933 922 to get advice about child health and parenting.
Phone numbers, emails and addresses for New Zealand citizenship offices in New Zealand, Australia and the United Kingdom.
Phone: +64 9 339 0853 (outside New Zealand)
Photo identification (ID)
Places to start researching NZ history
Placing a child for adoption
Please note that there is no urgent service available for Samoan-born applicants who have not yet been registered as New Zealand citizens by descent, or when your case involves an overseas adoption.
Plumbers, Gasfitters and Drainlayers Board
Police National Headquarters
Policy advice and administration of, a wide range of issues relating to veterans' entitlements, care and recognition.
Polynesian explorers and exploration of New Zealand
Polytechnics/Institutes of technology
Post the completed form to:
Postal address and email details
Postpone or defer paying your rates
Pre-adoptive birth certificate (someone else's)
Pre-adoptive birth certificate (your own)
Prescription glasses are permitted as long as your eyes are still visible.
Prescription subsidy scheme
Presence in NZ requirements
Previous name: Homecare Medical
Primary and community care
Print a web page in large text
Prison life and going to prison
Privacy Officer contact details
Privacy notice for Govt.nz
Privileges and responsibilities of a citizen
Problems accessing this website
Programme for the Endorsement of Forest Certification Chain of Custody.
Programmes for schools, teachers and parents to help children with behaviour and learning problems.
Promo tiles are owned and managed by the Govt.nz team. Tile placement is decided according to business needs, the timeliness of the content, and user priorities.
Promo tiles can be a variety of widths. They can display across the space available in groups of 1, 2 or 3. On extra small screens they snap to full width.
Promo tiles give a preview of priority content. They consist of a title, description and image.
Promote hunter safety and education.
Promote standards for hunting and management of game animals.
Promoting safety initiatives.
Proof of your identity in the community
Property can include anything of value that you own, lease, hire, or hold on hire purchase.
Property enduring power of attorney
Proposed product stewardship regulations for agrichemicals, their containers, and farm plastics
Provide well-considered advice and recommendations to the Minister of Conservation on matters relating to game animals and hunting.
Providing information and education to the sector.
Providing information when making financial transactions
Provincial Growth Fund (PGF)
Proving and protecting your identity
Public Finance Act Schedule 4 organisations
Public Finance Act Schedule 4a companies
Public Service Commission
Public Trust lists examples and timelines for estates that are:
Public holidays and regional anniversary days
Public holidays over Christmas and New Year
Public holidays, minimum wage, annual, sick, domestic violence and other leave, changing jobs
Public records, official information and parliamentary processes
Publish your content on Govt.nz
Queen Elizabeth II National Trust
Queen Elizabeth II National Trust (QEII)
Queenstown-Lakes District Council
Quotable Value New Zealand Ltd
REANNZ offers a range of services and products specifically designed to meet the needs of end users operating in these specialist environments.
Radio New Zealand Limited
Radio Spectrum Management
Raise awareness of the views of the hunting sector.
Raise the issue with your celebrant
Raising awareness of the views of the sector.
Rangitikei District Council
Read about other events of importance to the history of the
Read more information about:
Recent births, deaths and marriages, and civil union and name change records
Records and disclosure statement
Recreation and the environment
Refugees coming to New Zealand
Register and fertility clinics both hold the following information about donor-conceived people and their donors:
Register as a citizen by descent
Register as a citizen by descent and get a passport
Register does not record:
Register for information, which will include details about the clinic.
Register your baby's birth online
Register your citizenship
Register, contact the clinic that provided the original fertility treatment.
Register, you must complete this form:
Register. Clinics must give this information to the
Registered citizens by descent may also meet the requirements for citizenship by grant. Citizenship by grant allows you to pass down citizenship to children born outside New Zealand.
Registering a new baby and getting a birth certificate
Registering your citizenship by descent and ordering a passport costs NZD$451.40, AUD$448 or GBP£230.
Registering your new car or truck
Relationship property generally covers things that have financial value (such as insurance payouts, superannuation) and debts.
Renew or replace a child passport
Renew or replace your adult passport
Renew your adult passport
Renew your celebrant registration
Renew your driver licence
Renewing a child's passport costs $144. Child passports are valid for 5 years. Once a child turns 16 their passport is valid until it expires or is cancelled. After that, they must renew their passport as an adult.
Renewing an adult New Zealand passport costs $247. Adult passports are valid for 10 years.
Report a crime that's not an emergency
Report a serious work health and safety issue, injury or death to WorkSafe.
Request a tile by emailing
Request for NZ birth certificate or printout form BDM93B (PDF 265KB)
Request for NZ birth certificate or printout form BDM93B - accessible alternative (TXT 5.5KB)
Request for NZ birth certificate or printout form BDM93B accessible alternative (TXT 5.5KB)
Request for New Zealand marriage certificate or printout form BDM93M (PDF 408KB)
Request for New Zealand marriage certificate or printout form BDM93M - accessible alternative (TXT 4.3KB)
Request for death certificate or printout BDM93D (PDF 225KB)
Request for death certificate or printout BDM93D - accessible alternative (TXT 5KB)
Request information from the government
Request to search access register BDM 133 (PDF 161 KB)
Requirements for NZ citizenship
Requirements for Samoan citizens
Requirements for children
Research analysis and reports
Research and Education Advanced Network New Zealand (REANNZ) provides a specialist network, tools and services that facilitate the transfer of data intensive research, both nationally and internationally.
Research family histories
Research your family history
Researching life events has never been faster. You can search and view records and order historical certificates online.
Reserve Bank of New Zealand
Respond to fires and other emergencies.
Responsibilities of Fire and Emergency
Rest homes and residential care
Revisions to these Terms of use
Royal New Zealand Airforce
Saint Georgia and South Sandwich Islands
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
School fees and donations
School holidays, school zones, student loans, scholarships
School term start and end dates
School terms for future years
School zones, reviews and equity funding
Screen-saver size: Zero Data (
Screening services: cervical and bowel screening coordination centres
Search costs are on top of the cost of getting a certificate or printout.
Search for family history records in NZ
Search for family history records in New Zealand
Search for jobs in government, sign up for job alerts and find out how to apply for government vacancies.
Search for power of attorney templates and forms online or contact a lawyer.
Search historical birth, death and marriage records
Search historical births, deaths and marriages
Search historical records
Search old newspapers and archives
Search old newspapers, find archives and websites on local and national history.
Search online shipping lists
Search the Human Assisted Reproductive Technology Register
Search the records and medals of New Zealanders at war and get sources for doing your own military research.
Secretary and Chief Executive
Secretary for Justice and Chief Executive
Secretary for Local Government
See the application form for a list of people who can authorise your statutory declaration.
See the full list on the Whakarongorau Aotearoa website.
Seek forward or backward by 5 seconds
Select your preferred gender when you:
Self-employed or running a business
Send the original name change certificate with your application. This could be a deed poll certificate, adoption order or other document.
Send your completed form with your supporting documents and payment to the Department of Internal Affairs in New Zealand, Sydney or London.
Send your form, photos, documents and payment in a tracked courier bag to:
Separating from your spouse or partner
Separating or getting divorced
Services BDM helps provide
Services and support for anyone experiencing abuse from a partner, ex-partner, family member, flatmate, friend, or carer.
Services offered in residential care
Services provided for Auckland, include:
Services provided for the Ashburton district include:
Set up a prepaid funeral trust
Set up enduring powers of attorney (EPAs)
Sexual Harm Healthline: Safe to talk
Sharing your personal information
Shielded Site external widget accessibility issues
Shift workers and public holidays
Shipping lists might be able to tell you:
Should you and your partner activate your
Signing the declaration is not your wedding ceremony.
Sir Apirana Ngata Memorial scholarships.
Situation 1: When you were born
Situation 2: When you were adopted
Social Investment Agency (SIA)
Social Workers Registration Board
Some PDF documents do not have an accessible version
Some councils provide other transport options such as taxis or vans. Check with your local council about public transport options.
Some documents also require checking by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade (MFAT).
Some fertility treatments are funded for eligible people in NZ.
Some of the text has low contrast, reducing its readability and making it difficult to read for users with visual impairments.
Some organisations need only a RealMe login, and for others you need to set up a RealMe verified identity.
Some organisations that are in a category B country will let you change to get a category A authentication. It is worth asking the organisation if they will accept a category A authentication as they are quicker and cost less.
Some records cannot be accessed. These include:
Some scrollable content sections have no visible keyboard focus indicator
Some types of income have the tax taken out (deducted) before you receive it. For all other income you need to declare it to Inland Revenue and pay the tax.
Some types of visitor visas allow you to work in New Zealand for up to 3 months.
Sorted has advice to help you:
South Canterbury District Health Board
South Taranaki District Council
South Waikato District Council
South Wairarapa District Council
Southern Institute of Technology
Southern Response Earthquake Services Limited
Southland District Council
Southland District Health Board
Southland Fish and Game Council
Southland family services
Splitting shared property
Standard certificates are folded.
Standard certificates are folded. Decorative certificates are sent in a flat pack.
State Housing Appeals Authority
State what you want to happen with what you own. There are some legal limits, but a lawyer or trustee company can help with how those apply to your situation.
Statistical information and cookies
Statistical information collected
Status of children search
Statutory declarations, pay a fine, human rights, criminal records
Step 1 - Check what you need to apply for
Step 2 - Preparing your documents
Step 3 - Complete the application form and pay
Step 4 - Submit the application
Step by step information to help you get the right support and services for you and your baby.
Steps to Freedom grant confirmation letter
Steps to Freedom grant confirmation letter.
Steps to help you through the death of a loved one.
Storage and deletion of information
Store your will and EPAs in safe places
Store your will and enduring powers of attorney in safe places
Strategy for a Digital Public Service
Stratford District Council
Studying and qualifications in Australia
Submit a notice of objection to someone's wedding
Submit the completed application form and the documents to the Authentication Unit at the Department of Internal Affairs.
Submit your application form
Submit your completed form with your supporting documents and payment to the Department of Internal Affairs in New Zealand, Sydney or London.
Submit your form and payment
Submit your form, documents and payment
Subtle highlight for links, buttons, alert style box and success messages.
Success Criteria failures
Suicide Mortality Review Committee
Suitably qualified medical practitioner
Super. For lower incomes, you may also be able to get government help to pay for regular costs or unexpected expenses.
Support and information about gender-affirming healthcare
Support someone in prison
Support the New Zealand Geographic Board in the naming of our geographic features and places, including those on the continental shelf and in the Ross Sea region of Antarctica.
Supreme Court of New Zealand
Survey and feedback forms
Tai Poutini Polytechnic (TPP) is based on the West Coast and has campuses in Greymouth, Westport, Wanaka, Christchurch and Auckland.
Take your form and documents to any NZTA licensing agent.
Talk to your lawyer or legal advisor to make sure your property
Talk to your lead maternity carer about what screening you should have.
Taranaki Fish and Game Council
Taranaki Regional Council
Tari o te Kaitiaki Mana Tangata
Tax on investments and savings
Tax, benefits and finance
Te Aho o Te Kahu, Cancer Control Agency is a departmental agency reporting to the Minister of Health.
Te Kaunihera Rangahau Hauora o Aotearoa
Te Kaunihera a-Rohe o Te Tai Tokerau
Te Kaunihera o Tai Tokerau Ki Te Raki
Te Kawa Mataaho Public Service Commission
Te Kura Matatini ki Otago
Te Kura Matatini o Taranaki
Te Kura Matatini o Whitireia
Te Kura Toi Tangata Division of Education
Te Kura provides distance education to around 24,000 students each year from early childhood level to Year 13.
Te Mana Kounga Kai - Ahitereiria me Aotearoa
Te Mata Kairangi School of Graduate Research
Te Papa Tipu Innovation Park
Te Ratonga Todo O Aotearoa
Te Ratonga Whare Paremata
Te Reo Irirangi o Aotearoa
Te Reo Whakapuaki Irirangi
Te Taiurungi / Chief Executive
Te Tari Ture o te Karauna
Te Whare Takiura O Tamaki Makau Rau
Te Whare Takiura o Manukau
Te Whare Wananga O Murihiku
Te Whare Wananga o Waikato
Te Whare Wananga o te Awakairangi
Te kaunihera o Kirikiriroa
Teaching Council of Aotearoa New Zealand
Telecommunication Dispute Resolution
Telehealth services offered
Television New Zealand Limited
Telford Rural Polytechnic
Tell people about your name change
Tell someone you trust which lawyer or trustee company you worked with. This is most likely either:
Tell the right people where to find your will and
Tell them that your document is being notarised for an apostille or authentication.
Telling someone about your criminal record
Tenants, landlords and flatmates have different rights and responsibilities when renting a home or boarding house room.
Tertiary Education Commission
Testamentary guardians are not automatically responsible for the day-to-day care of children, though.
Text that looks like headings is not marked up as headings in HTML
Thames-Coromandel District Council
The ASA provides a free complaints process for consumers about the content and placement of advertisements.
The Accreditation Council (previously known as Telarc) works with businesses of all sizes, from one-person operations to major corporations and government departments. The certification programmes used have been developed internationally, nationally or within industry.
The Advertising Standards Authority (ASA) is the self-regulatory organisation of the advertising industry in New Zealand.
The Alcohol Regulatory and Licensing Authority (ARLA) helps New Zealanders by looking into decisions made by district licensing committees and local authorities.
The Authentication Unit can only process documents that meet their requirements.
The Authentication Unit can send any additional documents or items to an overseas organisation along with your apostilled or authenticated documents. Include them with your application.
The Authentication Unit does not provide an urgent service.
The Authentication Unit will send your documents to the address on your application form.
The Benefits Review Committee can review decisions about:
The Benefits Review Committee can review decisions made by the Ministry of Social Development, including Work and Income. A Review of Decision goes through an internal review before being seen by the Benefits Review Committee.
The Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration Act 2021 (BDMRRA) is the legislation that lets the Registrar-General of Births, Deaths and Marriages oversee changes to birth registrations and certificates.
The Board engages with ministers to establish a good partnership model to collectively return
The British Empire included United Kingdom dominions and colonies, but excluded protectorates and protected states. If you are unsure if you were born in the British Empire, contact us:
The Business.govt.nz, GoManufacturing and GoBusiness websites help small businesses in
The CRL is a 3.45km twin-tunnel underground rail link up to 42 metres below the Auckland city centre. It will transform the downtown Britomart Transport Centre into a two-way through-station that better connects the Auckland rail network.
The Catch History Review Committee can review decisions made by the Chief Executive of the Ministry for Primary Industries.
The Charter School Agency is a departmental agency established on 1 July 2024 to implement and operate the new charter school model, including negotiating and managing contracts and delivering funding.
The Charter School Agency is responsible for engaging with stakeholders, including those who may be interested in applying to be charter schools. It supports the Charter Schools Authorisation Board which approve sponsors for new and converting charter schools. The Agency is hosted by the Ministry of Education.
The Citizenship Office contacts you if they need more information.
The Citizenship Office will courier your citizenship certificate to you. We will return any original documents along with your certificate.
The Citizenship Office will send you a letter to let you know if your application has been approved.
The Citizenship Office will send your citizenship certificate to the New Zealand High Commission.
The Climate Change Commission is an independent Crown Entity. The purpose of the Commission is to provide independent, evidence-based advice to Government to help Aotearoa New Zealand transition to a low-emissions and climate-resilient economy.
The Commission has offices in Auckland and Wellington.
The Commission will help improve how New Zealand coordinates and plans these significant projects, make the most of the infrastructure the country already has, and plan long-term to ensure investment delivers what we need, where and when it is needed.
The Commission's 3 key areas of work are:
The Commissioner is separate from the Ministry for the Environment.
The Companies Office also looks after other business registers.
The Congratulatory Message Service team checks that your application is complete.
The Council audits against management system standards for:
The Customs Appeal Authority is an independent body that can review decisions made by the New Zealand Customs Service, including decisions about importing and exporting goods.
The Digital Identity Services Trust Framework regulator is called the Trust Framework Authority. The role of the authority is to accredit digital identity service providers.
The Disability Allowance is a weekly payment from Work and Income for people who have regular, ongoing costs because of a disability.
The District Court can hear claims up to a value of $350,000. Examples of common civil claims include:
The District Court is divided into 4 main specialties:
The District Court of New Zealand is the first place where most criminal and civil cases are officially presented and decided.
The District Courts have a broad criminal jurisdiction. Examples of common criminal claims include:
The Earthquake Commission (
The Electricity Corporation of New Zealand (ECNZ) has no staff or premises.
The External Reporting Board's work focuses on:
The Family Court hears cases on a broad range of topics. Examples of common Family Court claims include:
The Family Court process has been discontinued. If your application was already under consideration when the change happened, you can finish the process through the Family Court.
The Flesch reading ease score
The Government is consulting on proposals to amend the Waste Minimisation Act 2008 (WMA) and the Litter Act 1979.
The Government is seeking feedback on proposed regulations to enable a national take-back and recycling scheme for agrichemicals, their containers, and farm plastics.
The Governor of the Reserve Bank is accountable to the government for the bank's performance, but in most other areas has statutory independence about how outcomes are achieved.
The Govt.nz font stack lists all the fonts that are used, including those for people who cannot use Fira Sans. They all have universal browser support and are listed in the order they will appear. These alternative fonts provide a similar experience to Fira Sans.
The Govt.nz team will review your request in the context of the broader scope of Govt.nz.
The Govt.nz vision is to make it easy for you to find and use government services.
The HART register lets people conceived from donated embryos, eggs or sperm find out about their genetic origins and ask to find out about any others conceived from the same donor.
The Human Rights Review Tribunal is an independent body that can review decisions about human rights, privacy, and health and disability issues.
The Leadership Development Centre works in partnership with agencies across the system to deliver a range of products, programmes and services including:
The Mental Health and Wellbeing Commission has taken on the monitoring and advocacy function for mental health and addiction services from the outgoing Mental Health Commissioner at the Office of the Health and Disability Commissioner.
The Ministry for Ethnic Communities has offices in Wellington, Auckland and Christchurch.
The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) plays a central role in shaping and delivering a strong economy by delivering policy, services, advice and regulation to support business growth.
The Ministry of Education lists the school terms and holidays for future years.
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade (MFAT) represents New Zealand in formal communications with other countries and their governments. By building connections and influence in other countries, MFAT works to secure outcomes that matter to New Zealand.
The Ministry of Health website has advice on choosing an
The Ministry of Justice has information about personal orders:
The Ministry provides ethnic communities in New Zealand with information, advice and services and administers funds to support community development and social cohesion.
The National Cyber Security Centre (
The National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA) provides strong, national leadership to create an emergency management system that reduces the impact of emergencies.
The National Pacific Radio Trust owns and operates the Pacific Media Network, a New Zealand radio network and pan-Pasifika national broadcasting network. It runs NiuFM and 531pi based in Auckland as well as Wellington-based Samoa Capital Radio.
The Natural Hazards Commission
The Network for Learning Limited (N4L) was founded in the belief that equitable access to digital technology, will empower young New Zealanders to succeed in education and beyond.
The New Zealand Game Animal Council (
The New Zealand Government has allocated three billion dollars over a three-year term to invest in regional economic development through the Provincial Growth Fund (PGF).
The New Zealand Government logo, Coat of Arms and other logos, emblems and trade marks on Govt.nz are protected by law. You must not copy or use any logo, emblem or trade mark without express permission and compliance with applicable laws.
The New Zealand Railways Corporation (NZRC) is a statutory corporation that owns around 18,000 hectares of railway land. It was established to support
The New Zealand citizen parent needs to include their most recent New Zealand passport number.
The New Zealand telehealth services include:
The Office of Treaty Settlements and Takutai Moana
The PGF is administered by the Provincial Development Unit, part of the Ministry of Business, Innovation, and Employment.
The Parliamentary Commissioner for the Environment investigates environmental concerns independently of the government of the day. The Commissioner reports to Parliament through:
The Passport Office lets you
The Public Service Commissioner:
The Queen Elizabeth II National Trust is a statutory organisation independent from the government
The Registrar-General can investigate complaints that a marriage or civil union celebrant has not fulfilled their obligations under the Marriage Act 1955, the Civil Union Act 2004, or the Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration Act 1995.
The Registrar-General will keep any personal information in the complaint private and confidential. Only authorised people will be able to view your information. They will not share your personal information with the celebrant, church or approved organisation unless they have your consent. However, due to the nature of the complaint, the celebrant may work out who made it.
The Registrar-General will let you know the next steps in the process. They may also ask you for additional information.
The Registrar-General will make a preliminary assessment to see if it is a valid complaint and within their jurisdiction to investigate.
The Registrar-General will make one of the following decisions:
The Right Honourable Dame Cindy Kiro is the current Governor-General.
The Social Investment Agency seek to improve outcomes for people through the systematic, consistent, and rigorous use of data and evidence to invest earlier and more effectively.
The Social Wellbeing Agency (
The Southern Institute of Technology (SIT) is renown as the home of the Zero Fees Scheme (ZFS).
The Taiaroa Head Site No. 1 claim is the only one left to settle.
The Translation Service will tell you if the fee is different for your translation
The Transport Accident Investigation Commission do not investigate road accidents unless another mode of transport, like rail, was also involved.
The Trust Framework Authority regulator:
The Trust receives an annual grant from the Government, managed by NZ On Air and overseen by the Ministry for Culture and Heritage.
The University of Auckland
The Youth Court deals with criminal offending by young people that is too serious to be dealt with by the police in the community.
The Youth Court is a division of the District Court but is independent of government.
The ZFS is applicable to all New Zealand citizens, residents and permanent resident visa holders.
The accidents investigated are either:
The adoption is an intercountry adoption between countries that are signed up to the Hague Convention on Intercountry Adoption, and the adoption complies with those requirements.
The adoption laws in the country where the adoption took place are compatible with New Zealand law.
The all-of-government brand
The amendment is free of charge.
The apostille and authentication process is done by the Department of Internal Affairs' Authentication Unit.
The application fee is NZD$204.45.
The application process can take some time, and being approved does not necessarily mean you'll be chosen by birth parents who place their child for adoption.
The assessment considers things like:
The assessment criteria change from time to time. If you do not meet the criteria, making lifestyle changes like quitting smoking or losing weight could help you to become eligible. Your specialist will discuss this with you at your appointment.
The board, lottery distribution committees and the Minister's Discretionary Fund are serviced by the Department of Internal Affairs.
The celebrant is directed to improve their performance and the complaint is recorded.
The celebrant is removed from the New Zealand Gazette's list of marriage celebrants.
The ceremony has a set fee of $90, which you pay to the celebrant in advance
The committee has two representatives from the Ministry of Social Development and a community representative, and acts independently from the Ministry of Social Development.
The congratulatory message will be posted to the person or couple 10 days before their birthday or wedding anniversary, unless you asked for an earlier date.
The consequences for pretending to be a registered marriage or civil union celebrant are serious. If convicted, the punishment may be a prison sentence of up to 5 years.
The cookies do not collect personal information. You can disable them or clear them out of your web browser without affecting your ability to use the site.
The coordination of commemorative activities.
The council was established on 1 November 2010 replacing:
The couple celebrating their anniversary can also choose to get a message from the Mayor if they live in:
The court can only make personal orders for people who:
The current state of accessibility on Govt.nz and how improvements are being made.
The employer helpline for redundancy support is
The external icon could be rendered using CSS.
The family court decides:
The fee to confirm your gender on an evidentiary certificate is $112.40.
The fees you pay depend on the court you are going through. You may be able to get help to pay some court fees depending on your situation. Visit the Ministry of Justice website for more information.
The government digital presence is often messy, confusing and not well coordinated across agencies.
The information you enter in the form will only be shared with the people who are part of providing this service. This includes:
The law allows the sex on a birth certificate to be recorded as 'indeterminate'.
The letter and evidence could cover:
The main difference is when they start and end.
The management of the government's relationship with veterans and their representative organisations.
The marriage licence costs $150.
The meaning of the Treaty
The office of the Government Chief Digital Officer in the Digital Services branch, Department of Internal Affairs (
The office provides the Minister with information on issues relating to older people. Their team works with local, regional and central government, and community organisations to:
The only way to activate this
The organisation consists of:
The period you can apply for a congratulatory message is from 3 months before the event to 6 months after the event.
The person celebrating their birthday can also choose to get a message from the Mayor if they live in:
The person who died may have already told some people where their will is.
The process is different if you were born before 1978. Talk to the Citizenship Office about what you need to do.
The process is more complicated for category B countries, so authentication costs more and takes longer.
The process is more complicated for category B countries. Documents will need to be sent to an embassy. This type of authentication costs more and takes longer.
The promo tiles on Govt.nz link to timely or new information. See how to request a tile for your new service or tool.
The provision of ex-service memorials and maintenance of 183 Services Cemeteries throughout NZ.
The purpose of a personal care and welfare EPA
The purpose of an EPA for property
The register acts as an electronic noticeboard for information about money owed on cars and other expensive items.
The register is a record of people conceived from sperm or egg donations made at a New Zealand fertility clinic, and their donors. Donors can ask for the names of any children born from their donation, but the child must be 18 or over and give permission.
The requirements you need to meet to get New Zealand citizenship depend on when you arrived here or when you were born.
The review checks that the decision was fair and made within relevant law and policy. You can apply for a Review of Decision within 3 months of a decision being made.
The role of Te Aho o Te Kahu is to provide the New Zealand Government with cancer-related policy advice, as well as to provide national leadership to ensure our cancer services provide high quality and consistent cancer diagnosis and treatment to those affected by cancer, as well as strengthening our approach to cancer prevention and early detection.
The role of the Sport Integrity Commission
The services are supported by clinical teams of registered nurses, mental health nurses, psychologists, psychotherapists, psychiatrists, counsellors, doctors, paramedics, poisons officers, health advisors, family and sexual harm professionals, and emergency triage nurses.
The services offered by residential care providers can vary. They must tell you about the services they offer and be clear about which ones you must pay extra for.
The site is a way for people to find out what they need to do, as well as how government can support them. They do not need to know which agency to go to as information is presented by topic.
The span is used for screenreaders and hidden by default.
The statistical information referred to above can be viewed by site administrators and certain other DIA staff. It may also be shared with other government agencies.
The time it takes to process a passport application and descent registration is variable. Current demand for the services can impact timeframes. Allow at least 8 weeks (40 working days) plus time for delivery.
The timeframes below are estimates only. If we need any additional information during processing, we will contact you.
The tribunal hears claims about issues including:
The type of citizenship you can get depends on your situation.
The type of visa depends on whether you and your partner plan to:
The usual abbreviation for an ordinary power of attorney. It may also be called a general power of attorney.
The usual abbreviation for enduring power of attorney.
The verified identity service allows customers to easily and securely prove their identity online.
The voluntary register information is available to donors and people conceived from donor embryos or cells donated before 22 August 2005 with consent of the donor or donor conceived person.
The website for End of Life Service guides you through how to:
The widget allows screen reader access to the underlying page
The witness fills in the witness section of the application form. They also write your name and the date on the back of 1 of the photos, and then sign it.
Their agency covers both New Zealand and Australia.
Their campuses are located in:
Their collections build on Turnbull's personal collection and have grown through donation, bequest, legal deposit, and targeted purchasing to contain millions of items
Their collections span five areas:
Their core functions are to:
Their courses cover careers in:
Their focus is on areas and activities where we can have the most positive impact. The areas they work in are:
Their hearings are private. There are no lawyers or judges and members of the public and the media are not allowed into the hearing room.
Their inquiries are divided into two groups:
Their main purpose is to distribute funding to develop and enhance the wetland habitats of game birds and other wetland inhabitants.
Their new name has to consist of 1 surname and 1 or more other names. If you have religious, philosophical or cultural reasons to have only one name, you need to include a letter of explanation with your application.
Their office has a wide range of functions, including:
Their programme includes:
Their purpose is to help New Zealanders make better decisions about property.
Their research focuses on:
Their responsibilities are:
Their role is to help improve the quality of law making. They:
Their role is to manage the Crown's financial assets and debt to get the best value for the Government.
Their role is to manage the assets of:
Their role is to support:
Their service is available to residential and small business customers of telecommunications companies who are part of their scheme.
Their strategic priorities are defined as:
Their undergraduate and post graduate programmes include courses in:
Their work covers 4 main areas:
Their work involves matters that impact the long-term benefits that the electricity market provides to consumers, including:
Their work spans everything from influencing development of the national transport system to promoting road safety, managing the state highway, and licensing drivers and vehicles.
Then contact the Authentication Unit so they can check what you will be sending them. This could include:
There a various requirements you need to follow when filing your documents to a District Court. Learn more on the Ministry of Justice website.
There are 2 categories of authentication, depending on the country the documents are being used in.
There are 2 ways to apply for a grant of citizenship, depending on when and where you were born.
There are 2 ways you can get your documents translated:
There are 21 agencies represented in the
There are 3 different child support arrangements. You can choose a:
There are 3 main types of New Zealand citizenship. The type you can get depends on your situation.
There are 3 main types of New Zealand citizenship: by birth, by descent and by grant.
There are 4 public holidays over Christmas and New Year.
There are 4 types of full-time residential care. Providers sometimes offer more than one type of care within the same property.
There are 5 facilities, all of which are export-accredited and open access:
There are also websites to help you do your own family history research.
There are biosecurity and customs rules about what you can and cannot bring into New Zealand.
There are community services that can help you manage your finances.
There are different reasons for child support to end. Check the list of reasons on
There are implications for the disposal of your firearms, other arms items and ammunition if this
There are keyboard shortcuts you can use when watching YouTube. For these shortcuts to work, the YouTube video must have keyboard focus.
There are only online shipping lists of people who came to NZ:
There are restrictions on what you can buy, for example you cannot use the card to buy:
There are separate processes to change the gender on your New Zealand citizenship record and other identity documents.
There are some decisions you need to make that are unique to a property
There are various organisations throughout NZ that can help support you and your family.
There have been false online claims about birth certificates.
There is no official retirement age in New Zealand. The common age to retire is 65 when NZ Super and some other pension payments start.
There is no set timeframe for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade checks or authentication by overseas embassies.
These are authenticated by the Authentication Unit, and then sent to the MFAT for verification.
These are the legal terms and definitions of the various roles for an enduring power of attorney (EPA or EPOA).
These links are not permanent navigation points, and are only provided for a fixed term (usually 1 month).
These terms apply to the entire contents of the site, to any web feeds produced by the site and to any feedback or submissions provided through the site. By viewing and using the site, you will be deemed to agree to these Terms of use.
These tiles link to distinct topic areas, or timely information that is usually delivered on Govt.nz.
These tiles link to new services or tools to help with initial promotion, and to help gather feedback from users.
They administer New Zealand's business registers, including the Companies Register.
They administer the Government's incentive schemes and co-productions and certify NZ films for tax purposes. They invest in:
They also administer the NZSO National Youth Orchestra.
They also deal with complaints about social workers.
They also enforce regulations that provide the benefits of competition in markets where effective competition does not exist.
They also have commercial enterprises, including a publishing division, conference and function operations, cafes, a car park and retail stores.
They also have mortality review committees that review deaths to learn how best to prevent them.
They also hear appeals from tribunals and lower courts, including the District Court.
They also offer several courses through online learning.
They also operate the New Zealand Special Air Service (NZSAS) who work on difficult overseas missions and in terrorist situations.
They also provide information on how the classification system works in New Zealand.
They also provide local river flow and lake information.
They also provide regional council activities including:
They also sell international standards.
They also support employers to find staff by providing:
They are a research-based organisation. They:
They are an independent body set up under the Employment Relations Act 2000. They have offices in:
They are formerly known as the State Services Commission.
They are part of the international community made up of over 120 National Research and Education Networks (NRENs).
They are responsible for classifying films, games, computer files and other publications under the Films, Videos, and Publications Classification Act 1993.
They are responsible for:
They are the legal owner of New Zealand House in London.
They can help you understand your rights and responsibilities as an employee or employer. Employment New Zealand aims to support positive relationships between employers and employees, and to promote safe, fair and harmonious workplaces.
They can review decisions made by the Government Superannuation Fund Authority including decisions about entitlements to money from the fund.
They can review decisions made by the Office of Film and Literature Classification about the classification of publications including:
They carry out research to:
They collect most of the government's revenue and administer a number of social support programmes.
They consider and determine the annual remuneration and allowances of:
They consider complaints about:
They consider offenders who are eligible:
They cover Kaikoura, Hurunui, Waimakariri, Christchurch, Selwyn, Ashburton, Timaru, Mackenzie, and the Waitaki and Waimate districts.
They deal with civil and criminal appeals from cases heard in the High Court, the Employment Court and criminal proceedings in District Courts.
They develop standards in areas like:
They do not have a hands-on-role in daily traffic, aviation, rail or maritime matters.
They enforce laws that promote competition and protect consumers in New Zealand. This includes laws that prohibit misleading and deceptive conduct by traders, and protect consumers when they borrow money or buy goods on credit.
They focus on removing barriers and bringing about societal changes that improve the lives of disabled people.
They focus on serious fraud which may include:
They grant and register intellectual property (IP) rights in NZ. This includes:
They have close links with community organisations representing the interests of older people, like:
They have identified 3 priority areas:
They have interactive exhibitions, dynamic events and education programmes. Their collections are short term, long term or permanent.
They have researchers available who can help you use the Turnbull's collection.
They hear appeals from reviews of decisions made by Housing New Zealand about income-related rents and applicants' eligibility and need for Housing New Zealand housing.
They hear decisions that have been to the Employment Relations Authority and are still not resolved.
They hear major crimes and civil claims involving more than $200,000. They deal with judicial reviews of administrative action and admiralty proceedings.
They help people get jobs by providing:
They help the Clerk of the House (their chief executive) provide the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives with:
They help you (the donor), by giving the people you choose (your attorneys), the power to do some things for you. Your attorneys do not need to be lawyers or have any legal training.
They help you make informed choices about your student finance, how to apply for it and manage it online. This includes:
They help young people, aged between 12 and 24 years old, to use their knowledge, skills and experience to participate confidently in their communities.
They manage 2 investment funds:
They must apply for their passport as an adult.
They must renew their passport as an adult.
They need to be paid before assets can be handled as set out in the will.
They negotiate the settlement of historical Treaty of
They offer a free telephone service, 24 hours a day 7 days a week, that:
They offer a range of applied vocational programmes including:
They offer a range of qualifications and courses that you can study by distance and online learning.
They offer certificates, diplomas, degrees and postgraduate qualifications through the following faculties:
They offer courses including:
They offer courses through their:
They offer courses to New Zealand and international students in:
They offer first and postgraduate degrees in:
They offer information on:
They offer internet and voice services to small and medium-sized businesses.
They offer over 180 qualifications from certificates through to master degrees covering subjects including:
They offer services across the residential, rural, government and commercial sectors, including:
They offer technical and professional qualifications, from university-standard degrees to diplomas, certificates and foundation courses. They also deliver short awards and adult community education courses across the region.
They provide an independent one-stop shop for all parliamentary electoral matters including services to:
They provide both independent oversight of the industry and increased consumer protection.
They provide building practitioners, officials, consumers and other regulators training, guidelines and information about their roles and responsibilities.
They provide certificate, diploma, degree and post-graduate programmes in:
They provide income support to those in need through:
They provide information and resolve disputes about unlawful discrimination.
They provide legal representation for people who claim to have been unlawfully discriminated against, and help them take their case to the Human Rights Review Tribunal.
They provide research and consulting in:
They provide services for Central Otago, including:
They provide services for Christchurch, Lyttelton and the Banks Peninsula, including:
They provide services for Hamilton city, including:
They provide services for Hutt City, including:
They provide services for Napier, including:
They provide services for older people, including:
They provide services for the Buller district, including:
They provide services for the Carterton District, including:
They provide services for the Chatham Islands, including:
They provide services for the Clutha District, including:
They provide services for the Invercargill district, including:
They provide services for the Otago region, including:
They provide services which include:
They receive administrative support from the
They replaced the Residence Review Board, the Refugee Status Appeals Authority, the Removal Review Authority, and the Deportation Review Tribunal.
They research and consult on:
They resolve complaints about infringements of health and disability rights by service providers. More serious complaints may be formally investigated by HDC.
They support organisations who employ territorial and cadet force personnel.
They were established in 2003.
They work in partnership with national sport organisations (NSOs), allocating resources to sports organisations and athletes and delivering world-leading support to impact performance.
They work in the following areas:
They work with clinicians, providers and consumers to improve health and disability support services.
They work with members to support their use of the network.
They're not involved in day-to-day environmental management.
Things that come under this
Think about what your needs will be if your
This QWBA explains how the income tax rules apply when a close company provides short-stay accommodation (eg, through Airbnb, Bookabach, Booking.com or Holiday Houses). It explains when and how the mixed-use asset rules and the standard tax rules apply, and when shareholders or employees will receive income from their use of the property.
This allows your loved ones to see your wishes, which might be hidden in your will until finishing the probate application.
This also applies to children born by IVF to a surrogate.
This authority is limited to 2 areas.
This can confuse screen reader users, as the structure and hierarchy of the content are not properly conveyed.
This certificate will state:
This does not include regular cleaning and check ups.
This draft operational statement explains the income tax treatment of amounts societies, clubs and other associations receive from members, other than amounts subject to a specific tax exemption such as for charities or sports clubs. It explains that the mutual association provisions override the mutuality principle for trading stock and services supplied to members. It also explains that subscriptions and levies will not be covered by the mutuality principle if the association is not able to distribute to members. Such amounts may be business income or income under ordinary concepts, depending on the circumstances. The statement will be prospective in application when finalised.
This enduring power of attorney (
This free course helps parents focus on the needs of children. You have to do this first.
This group was previously called the Organised and Financial Crime Agency New Zealand.
This includes information about:
This interpretation statement considers the application of s CD 22(6) and (7) of the Income Tax Act 2007 in relation to the factors to be taken into account in determining whether an off-market cancellation of shares is made in lieu of the payment of a dividend.
This is a link which leads to an external website
This is a link which leads to an external website.
This is a link which leads to another page on the website
This is a link which leads to another page on the website.
This is a link with focus
This is a way of making sure your loved ones can pay for your funeral with less stress.
This is another option provided by the Family Court. The court appoints a person to look after your property and financial affairs.
This issue makes it difficult for keyboard-only users to navigate backward through the interface, potentially causing frustration and hindering efficient navigation.
This list only includes the most popular topics for people using our website. If you cannot find what you're looking for, use our website search or visit our
This listing is for consultations that government departments are asking for feedback on.
This means people who rely on screen readers or who need to modify the way the text looks could have difficulty reading or understanding some content.
This means you should be able to:
This notice explains how and when Govt.nz collects personal information, what we do with it and your right to see or change it.
This order applies when your annual income or government benefit is below a certain amount, or if any of the property to be managed is worth less than $25,000.
This organisation is legally known as New Zealand Vice-Chancellors Committee.
This redevelopment programme will see the majority of the existing state houses replaced with warm, dry state, affordable, KiwiBuild, and private market houses over the next 20 years.
This requirement comes under the Arms Registry amendments to the Arms Act
This site generates persistent session cookies (that is, they have an expiry date and are removed on that date) for the purpose of monitoring site usage.
This site is owned and maintained by the All-of-Government Service Delivery team, part of the Department of Internal Affairs.
This website is designed to be used by everyone.
Timeline and information for dealing with the estate
Timeline for dealing with estates
To apply for and receive Working for Families or Best Start, contact Inland Revenue (
To apply for and receive paid parental leave, contact Inland Revenue (
To apply for citizenship in New Zealand, contact the Department of Internal Affairs (
To apply for citizenship under section 7A of the Citizenship (Western Samoa) Act 1982, you must meet 1 of the eligibility criteria.
To apply you need to call Work and Income to discuss your situation and find out how they can help.
To be effective, the contrast ratio between text colour and the background needs to be at least 4.5:1.
To be eligible for any funded treatment, you and your partner (if you have one) both have to be New Zealand citizens or eligible to live in NZ for at least 2 years.
To become a citizen by grant, you need to apply.
To become a sperm donor, you generally have to:
To become an egg donor, you generally have to:
To change or cancel your application, contact the Congratulatory Message Service team.
To change the gender on your passport, you need to complete a passport application form and pay for a new passport.
To change the sex marker on your birth certificate, you must complete a statutory declaration and apply to Births, Deaths and Marriages.
To change your name on other forms of ID, like your driver licence, you may need evidence to show you have officially changed your name.
To check the progress of your application, click on the link below. Select 'Continue saved application', then log in using RealMe.
To check the surname used on your birth certificate, you have to apply and pay for the birth certificate.
To check whether you can live or work in NZ, contact
To check you meet travel and transit requirements, check with your airline.
To check your application status log in to
To ensure support is targeted, effective and designed with small businesses in mind,
To find NZ embassies in certain countries and territories, visit the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade (
To find out if you are a New Zealand citizen, use the online tool or ask the Citizenship Office.
To find out if your celebrant is registered visit our celebrants page.
To find out information relating to:
To find your whakapapa (genealogy), you can search old birth, death and marriage records.
To get a New Zealand passport, you need to be a citizen.
To get a certified copy, you must have your original document copied, stamped and initialled by:
To get a divorce, you apply to the Family Court for a dissolution order.
To get a residency visa, your adoptive parents need to apply for you as a dependent child.
To get your child a New Zealand passport, you need to register their citizenship. You can order them a passport at the same time when you fill out the form.
To get yourself a New Zealand passport, you need to register your citizenship. You can order a passport at the same time by ticking a box on the form.
To make a celebrant complaint you must provide the following information:
To receive a congratulatory message for an event being celebrated in January, apply by 7 December at the latest.
To renew a child passport online, you must have a:
To renew your passport online you must be aged 16 or older and have a:
To save time, book an appointment online before you visit a BDM office.
To set up and maintain your child support payments, contact Inland Revenue (
To update a sex marker and change a name
To use a document overseas it may need to be apostilled or authenticated. Apostilles and authentications are certificates that prove the signature, stamp or seal on a document is genuine.
To withdraw your objection, email
Together, they work to provide consistent, high-quality health services for all people.
Toggle captions off, on, or cycle through the available tracks
Toi Ohomai Institute of Technology
Tourism New Zealand is the organisation responsible for marketing New Zealand to the world as a tourist destination.
Trace your family history
Trading Standards do not investigate products that have safety requirements set by other government agencies:
Trading in annual holidays for cash
Training and apprenticeships
Transferring a public holiday
Transgender surgery and therapy
Translating documents into English
Translating official documents
Translations included as part of your application
Transport Accident Investigation Commission
Transport after an injury
Transport and vehicle costs
Travel or move to Australia
Travelling or living overseas
Travelling to or currently in NZ, customs, border security, refugees
Travelling to or living in NZ
Trustee company or trustee corporation
Try asking your neighbours to be quiet if they're making too much noise. You can also complain to their landlord or the council.
Tumuaki o te Mana Arotake
Types of citizenship: birth, descent and grant
Types of citizenship: grant, birth and descent
Types of evidence you can use:
Types of residential care
UNITEC Institute of Technology
Under certain circumstances the Family Court may confer certain rights on people born from donated embryos or cells who are aged 16 or 17 years to enable them to be treated as being aged 18 years or more.
Under the Privacy Act 2020, you have the right to access and ask us to correct any personal information you have provided to us.
Under the terms of the licence, you must attribute the content to the Crown and the Govt.nz website.
Understand the types of citizenship
Undertaking management functions for designated herds of special interest.
Unexpected accidents or illnesses can occur at any age, and an
United Kingdom national or,
Universal College of Learning
Universities NZ lists their points of focus and details around their legal functions.
Universities NZ's key functions are to:
Universities New Zealand (UNZ)
Unless noted as an exception, or on specific items or collections of content:
Update on New Zealand House
Update sex marker on birth certificate
Update the sex on your birth certificate
Update the sex on your child's birth certificate
Update your celebrant registration details
Update your will and EPAs
Upgrade to citizenship by grant
Urgent applications cost more and take up to 10 working days. You cannot make an urgent application if your case involves an overseas adoption.
Urgent citizenship & passport
Urgent citizenship and passport application
Use 105 to report crimes to Police that are not urgent and do not need Emergency Services.
Use RealMe to prove who you are online and securely access many government and private sector services online.
Use RealMe to prove your identity online
Use Zero Data to get free access to government-sponsored websites. This way, money is not a barrier to getting important services and information.
Use of personal information
Use of statistical information
Use the Te Aka online dictionary to understand
Use the calculator to get an estimate on what you might be eligible for.
Use the form below to find out whether:
Use the form below to find out:
Use the portrait or landscape posters to:
Use the self-check tool to find out if you are eligible for New Zealand citizenship.
Use this online service to order a certificate for a marriage that happened in the last 75 years.
Use this self-check tool to find out if you meet the requirements for New Zealand citizenship.
Use your NZ documents overseas
User research information
User research participation
Using an agent to access information
Utility links and page information
Valuers Registration Board
Vehicle licensing and road user charges
Verified identity service
Victoria University of Wellington
Victoria University of Wellington.
Virgin Islands of the United States
Visa expiry and re-entry conditions
Visas for workers from specific countries
Visit He Tohu at the National Library
Visit the New Zealand Transport Agency website for information about updating your driver licence.
Visit the Waitangi treaty grounds and treaty house
Visiting Heritage New Zealand Pouhere Taonga heritage sites
Visitor visas and the NZeTA
Voluntary registrations are for donations made before 22 August 2005 that result in a birth.
Waikaremoana Hydro Scheme
Waikato Institute of Technology
Waikato Management School
Waikato Pathways College.
Waimakariri District Council
Wait to find out if your application is approved
We are a free and independent dispute resolution service. We look into complaints by customers about their banks.
We carry out annual audits of hundreds of public entities on behalf of the Auditor-General.
We do not claim to own your copyright material. You do, however, grant DIA a non-exclusive, royalty-free and irrevocable licence to:
We do not own these social media channels and encourage you to read their privacy policy and conditions of use. Please protect your personal information and others by not publishing any personal information such as names and addresses.
We do not use, share or transfer personal information in connection with the site except as set out in this notice, or as otherwise set out somewhere on the site (including in terms linking to the site).
We last audited this website with an automated scan in
We may pass on relevant content from that form to other people within DIA, other government agencies or third parties who administer or are participating in the particular project or consultation that the form relates to. This could include your email address and other identifying information.
We use Google Universal Analytics to collect statistical information about your visit to help us improve the site. This information is aggregated and does not identify you personally. It includes:
We will only use personal information provided to us for the purpose of:
We will process your application as soon as possible.
We will process your application within 15 working days.
Web Accessibility Standard 1.1
Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (
Web accessibility is essential for disabled people and useful for everyone in a variety of situations.
WebAim colour contrast checker
Websites to support small businesses in NZ
Wellington Fish and Game Council
Wellington Railway Station
Wellington family services
West Coast District Health Board
West Coast Fish and Game Council
West Coast Regional Council
West Coast family services
Western Bay of Plenty District Council
Western Institute of Technology (Taranaki)
Westland District Council
Whaia te pono kia puawai ko te tika
Whanganui District Council
Whangarei District Council
What are your financial goals?
What counts as income for benefits
What do you want to have happen with your business?
What does not go on Govt.nz
What happens after you apply for a licence
What happens after you make a complaint
What happens next and timeframes
What instructions and restrictions will you include in your
What is a civil union certificate
What is a name change certificate
What it means to be a citizen by descent
What it means when your parent signs the form
What someone owes to others is also part of the estate. These are, for example:
What the notary public will do
What to do if you have lost your New Zealand citizenship certificate, or if you need to prove whether or not you are a New Zealand citizen.
What to do when someone dies
What to get ready before you apply for NZ citizenship
What to include when you email us:
What to organise before you die
What you can and cannot bring with you into New Zealand
What you can change your name to
What you can do with RealMe
What you can get a congratulatory message for
What you can search online
What you need to do when someone dies
When do you want to activate your
When someone dies overseas
When someone dies without a will
When the child turns 3, you stop getting Best Start payments.
When the message will be posted
When there are enduring powers of attorney
When to update your will and
When you apply for New Zealand citizenship by grant, you need to provide documents to prove your identity, such as:
When you apply for an apostille you can request either a paper or an electronic apostille (e-apostille).
When you apply to register as a union, they will:
When you arrive in Australia
When you become a New Zealand citizen, you will have the same privileges as a person who was born here. You will also have the same responsibilities.
When you both agree to get a divorce
When you can no longer manage in your own home, you can move into a rest home or hospital. Talk to your doctor or other health professionals about the level of care you need.
When you find out about your application
When you get a flatmate in your own house
When you give general authority to your attorney under a property
When you have a problem at work
When you have an activated
When you have mental capacity or capability, you understand the information given to you and the decisions you need to make. You can think through the consequences of your decisions and communicate your decisions.
When you need an NZ student visa
When you need to use a New Zealand birth certificate in another country, you might be asked to get the document apostilled or authenticated. Some countries call this legalisation.
When you need to use a New Zealand document in another country, you may be asked to get the document apostilled or authenticated.
When you pay tax or do a tax return you need to know what to include as income. Check to see what counts as a source of income.
When you register to participate in user research you provide us with your email and contact details.
When you register your baby, you must give them a name. You can also:
When you separate from your partner, you can make a separation agreement, or apply to the Family Court for a Separation Order if you want to.
When you start a new job, you'll automatically be enrolled in KiwiSaver if you're eligible and not a member already. You can also join through your current employer or directly with a provider.
When you use a NZ document in another country, you might need to get it translated. You will probably need to get it apostilled or authenticated too.
When your parent signs the form, it means they are giving consent for their information to be collected and used to:
Where to file your documents
Where to find the will of someone who died
Where to start when thinking about residential care
Whether you can get help depends on how much you and your partner earn and what money and assets you each have. You may need to pay some of this back, depending on your situation.
Whether you need an apostille or authentication depends on the country your documents will be used in.
While there are no absolute barriers to access for disabled people using our website, we know a little more work is required to fully conform to
Whitireia Community Polytechnic
Who MBIE works with to provide the website content
Who can access information on the register?
Who can access your personal information
Who can move into residential care
Who do you want to be your attorney? You can only have 1.
Who has to sign the form and why
Who sees the information in the form
Who the messages are from
Who to contact for more help
Who will your attorney need to consult with (other than you), when they make decisions about your personal care and welfare?
Why these goals were chosen
Will you still manage some aspects of your personal care and welfare yourself or will you give your attorney responsibility for all your personal care and welfare needs? Keep in mind the circumstances under which this
Wills only take effect after death.
Wills, probate and estates
With a RealMe verified identity to prove who you are online, you can:
With an apprenticeship, you can earn money while getting skills and qualifications.
Withdrawing your application
Without a visible focus indicator, sighted keyboard-only users may struggle to navigate and interact with the content.
Without an accessible name, screen readers cannot identify the purpose of the iframe, making it difficult for visually impaired users to understand what it is without having to interact with it.
Work and Income New Zealand
Work and Income can help with:
Work and Income have an online tool you can use to check what other payments and assistance you can get.
Work and Income supply the Community Services Card (CSC) on behalf of the Ministry of Health to help lower healthcare costs.
Work and Income will load money onto a payment card you can use at stores that accept them. The amount you can get will depend on your situation. You do not have to pay this money back.
Work out how to save money on your energy bills, make your home more energy efficient and protect the environment.
Work that leads to residence
Working after 65: ACC levies and entitlements
Working days do not include weekends or public holidays. The timeframes above do not include delivery times for certificates.
Working for Families and Best Start
Working for Families and Best Start: Contact
Working for Families payments
Working here if your partner is in NZ
Working in NZ after you study
Working in NZ for more than 3 months
Working in NZ for up to 3 months
Working on public holidays
Working while on a student visa
Working with a trustee company or lawyer helps you and your loved ones. Sorted also lists online options that might work for your situation.
Workplace safety and injuries
World War One service records
Writing a will can even motivate you to start or improve your retirement planning.
Writing a will helps you plan for both:
You also need to get an identity referee or witness to support your application.
You also need to provide evidence of:
You and your household must be assessed and approved as suitable to adopt a child.
You are a New Zealand citizen by birth if one of the following situations is true for you:
You are a New Zealand citizen by birth.
You are automatically a New Zealand citizen by birth if, at the time of your adoption, at least 1 of your adoptive parents was a New Zealand citizen.
You are automatically a New Zealand citizen by birth if, at the time of your adoption, at least 1 of your adoptive parents was:
You are automatically a New Zealand citizen by birth.
You are eligible for New Zealand citizenship if you were born in Western Samoa on or after 13 May 1924 and before 1 January 1949.
You are eligible for New Zealand citizenship if:
You are likely to be a New Zealand citizen by birth.
You are not a New Zealand citizen if your adoptive parents were diplomats from another country and serving in New Zealand at the time of your birth.
You are not officially a citizen until you have registered.
You are only a citizen if, when you were born, at least 1 of your parents was:
You can access and reuse data from across government on data.govt.nz.
You can access information on the HART register if:
You can add more personal touches, too. A will has very specific wording for it to be valid and work when you need it to.
You can also apply to verify your address to prove where you live to any organisation that uses RealMe.
You can also check information about yourself held by the
You can also keep a copy of your will or
You can also log in to create your own plan online.
You can also see information about:
You can apply at our public counters in Auckland, Wellington, Christchurch, Sydney and London. Contact us to make an appointment:
You can apply for Best Start online when you register your baby.
You can apply for NZ citizenship if you were born in Samoa on or after 13 May 1924 and before 1 January 1949, or if you meet 1 of the other eligibility criteria.
You can apply for a divorce together when you both agree to divorce, or you can apply for a divorce on your own. Read more information on the Ministry of Justice's website:
You can apply for a new birth certificate on the name change form, or request one later.
You can apply for a printout of all recorded, unrestricted information using the forms below.
You can apply for congratulatory messages:
You can apply for your child to be granted New Zealand citizenship. Include a letter with the application form that explains why your child should be granted citizenship even though they do not meet the requirements. You should include any evidence you have.
You can apply for your child's first passport online.
You can apply for your first passport online.
You can apply in person at the New Zealand High Commission in Apia. You don't need to make an appointment.
You can apply online if you live in
You can apply online if you live in NZ, or you will arrive in NZ more than 3 working days before you get married.
You can apply online if you want to:
You can apply online or use a printed form. Make sure you apply at least 8 weeks before you plan to come to New Zealand.
You can apply online, in person, or by post.
You can apply to adopt a child in New Zealand as a couple or as an individual.
You can apply to change your name if:
You can apply to the Family Court to be treated as though you are 18.
You can appoint a trustee corporation to be your attorney. A trustee corporation acts for you in a neutral and independent way but you need to pay for this.
You can ask for an ambulance, police, fire service or search and resuce.
You can ask them to review a decision about:
You can ask to swap up to 1 week of your annual holidays for cash each year.
You can become a citizen by grant before your child is born outside New Zealand. You must meet the requirements.
You can book an appointment in Auckland, Manukau, Wellington or Christchurch.
You can book an appointment in Auckland, Wellington or Christchurch.
You can bring your pet here, but they must meet specific health standards. These change, depending on the country your pet is coming from.
You can change all or part of your name.
You can change the name in your new passport if your name was changed by:
You can change the sex recorded on your birth certificate to 'indeterminate' if your sex was incorrectly registered as male or female when you were born.
You can change your civil union to a marriage (or your marriage to a civil union) without dissolving your current relationship. You need to complete a form and hold another marriage or civil union ceremony.
You can check the contrast ratio of Govt.nz colours using an online tool.
You can choose a standard or a decorative certificate which has an image on it.
You can choose to appoint someone else to access this information for you, see
You can choose to give your attorneys specific powers for certain situations or general responsibility for everything.
You can choose to have a different gender on your citizenship certificate than what is shown on your birth certificate.
You can choose to put restrictions on who can use your eggs.
You can choose to put restrictions on who can use your sperm.
You can complain if you've been discriminated against in many areas of public life, including:
You can complain if your personal information is being revealed without your agreement or if an organisation refuses to let you see information about you.
You can complete the PDF form in Adobe Acrobat Reader for Windows or Mac, or print it off and complete it by hand.
You can courier, post or deliver the application in person.
You can donate money to charities and approved organisations directly from your pay.
You can download contact details for government organisations, their chief executives and chairpeople.
You can find out all about Births, Deaths and Marriages on Govt.nz.
You can find the advice on Digital.govt.nz:
You can get ACC payments and NZ Super payments at the same time, but only for 2 years.
You can get a New Zealand residency visa if, at the time of your adoption:
You can get a certificate that proves you are not a New Zealand citizen.
You can get a free congratulatory message for significant birthdays and wedding anniversaries from the King and New Zealand dignitaries.
You can get help paying for:
You can get the payments if:
You can get your credit report for free. If your information is wrong, you can get your record corrected.
You can give local and central government feedback on their plans before they make decisions.
You can lodge a notice of your intended marriage if you have been resident in New Zealand for at least 7 days and are:
You can make a claim if the celebrant:
You can make a request to get your birth certificate apostilled or authenticated by phone or post.
You can make a will by using a:
You can only be the executor if you were named in the will to act as one.
You can order a New Zealand passport at the same time as you register your citizenship by descent.
You can order a birth certificate by phone. You can pay by credit or debit card.
You can order a birth certificate for anyone born in New Zealand.
You can order a civil union certificate online, by phone, post, or in person.
You can order a name change certificate:
You can order by phone or in person from a Births, Deaths and Marriages office:
You can order certificates in person in Auckland,
You can order certificates in person in Auckland, Manukau, Wellington or Christchurch. You must book an appointment online.
You can order certificates in person in Auckland, Manukau, Wellington or Christchurch. You'll need photo ID.
You can order death printouts from Birth, Deaths and Marriages online.
You can order marriage printouts from:
You can order more recent records from Births, Deaths and Marriages.
You can order online for a person born within the last 100 years.
You can order your child a New Zealand passport at the same time as you register their citizenship by descent.
You can post or courier your application to Wellington, Sydney or London.
You can register your child and order a certificate at the same time.
You can register your child as a New Zealand citizen by descent and get them a New Zealand passport.
You can request an evidentiary certificate to confirm your gender and any other changes in details since you gained citizenship.
You can search NZ birth, death, marriage, civil union and name change records.
You can search and order online:
You can search for registered NZ companies.
You can search for the records and medals of New Zealanders who were in the armed forces.
You can search online for:
You can send feedback about this website by emailing us or by post.
You can set up your device to suit your needs.
You can still apply for government help if you cannot get
You can submit a complaint to them by:
You can take unpaid leave if your employer agrees to it. The agreement should be recorded in writing.
You can then register your baby as a New Zealand citizen by descent and apply for their New Zealand passport.
You can trim most branches or roots that cross into your property up to the property boundary.
You can update the sex marker on your birth certificate if your birth was registered in New Zealand.
You can update your sex marker and change your name on the same form.
You can use Zero Data if your mobile phone uses:
You can use shipping lists to find out how and when people arrived in New Zealand.
You can use the Human Assisted Reproductive Technology (HART) Register to learn about your genetic origins and, if all parties agree, contact donors.
You can use the Tribunal to settle small claims up to $30,000.
You can use the Working for Families calculator to check if you can get the other types of payments.
You can use your SuperGold Card to travel free on scheduled off-peak public transport.
You can use your marriage certificate as official evidence of your marriage.
You can usually file your documents in person, by post or electronically.
You can withdraw all your savings when you turn 65, as long as you've been a KiwiSaver member for at least 5 years.
You can withdraw your application at any time. You may not get a refund.
You can work out how much you might get or how much you may have to pay under a child support formula assessment with
You cannot enter the United Kingdom to get married or enter into a civil union on the 6 month tourist visa that most NZers can get at the UK border.
You cannot find out information about any genetic siblings who were not donor-conceived.
You cannot pass citizenship to any children who are born outside New Zealand. They will need to
You choose the rest home or hospital that you want to move to and can afford.
You could get free access to internet if these options are available to you:
You decide if your attorney can make decisions about everything to do with your personal care and welfare or only decide on some things. There are some decisions that your attorney cannot make.
You do not have to do anything official when you separate from your partner, but a separation agreement or separation order can help to keep things clear.
You do not need to be a New Zealand citizen. Visitors to New Zealand can marry or have a civil union here.
You do not need to do anything else until the ceremony.
You get the end-of-life wishes and legacy you want
You get your printout by email after about 8 working days.
You have to pay for the search even if the record is not found.
You may also be eligible for a funded consultation with the fertility specialist.
You may also get your documents translated by:
You may also meet the requirements to apply for for citizenship by grant. If you are successful, any future children you have who are born outside New Zealand can
You may be a New Zealand citizen by descent if your situation fits one of the following scenarios:
You may be able to get child support even if you and the child, or the other parent, lives outside of
You may be able to get help paying for an eye test and glasses. Whether you can get help depends on how much you and your partner earn and what money and assets you each have.
You may be able to get help paying for immediate and essential dental treatment such as fillings and extractions.
You may be able to get help to cover your expenses or subsidise the cost of your care.
You may be able to get help to pay for car repairs if you:
You may be contacted to confirm that all details are correct.
You may choose to share personal information with us when you:
You may need to get an apostille or authentication certificate for the death certificate, or have it translated into another language.
You may need to pay for a replacement certificate. You can pay over the phone by credit or debit card.
You may qualify for help with cleaning your home, doing the laundry, buying essential appliances, mowing the lawn, weeding the garden and getting essential home maintenance tasks done. Find out how to get these home support services and if you qualify.
You might be asked to get your birth certificate translated into another language.
You might be eligible for citizenship by descent if you:
You might be eligible for citizenship by grant if you were born:
You might be eligible to have the fee either:
You might find some limits to using sponsored websites if they have or link to content outside of Zero Data.
You might need a death certificate if you're administering someone's estate or applying for a funeral grant from Work and Income or ACC.
You might not need an official death certificate.
You might not need an official marriage certificate.
You move permanently into residential care after having a bad fall. Before your fall, you had been living independently and taking care of all the decisions about your money, property and other assets.
You must apply for a review within 30 working days after the day a decision is entered into the Register of Classification Decisions by the Classification Office.
You must file your documents to the correct court. This may be the court nearest to you, but sometimes it can be a court in another suburb or town, depending on the type of case.
You must follow the road rules for your safety and the safety of others when you drive. If you do not, you can be fined or have your driver licence or car taken off you.
You must get legal advice from a lawyer, qualified legal executive or a trustee corporation when creating your personal care and welfare
You must have a needs assessment if you want to get government-funded home help. Find out if you qualify and the support services you might get.
You must include copies of 2 different documents that show your current name. These do not need to be certified or authorised.
You must make an appeal within 28 days of the authority's decision.
You must meet 1 of the following 4 eligibility criteria:
You must provide 2 identical passport-style photos. The photos need to be signed by your chosen witness.
You must provide a certified copy of 1 of the following:
You must provide a certified copy of any 1 of the following, as long as it states your name, date and place of birth:
You must provide a certified copy of your own photo ID or an identity referee declaration form to confirm your identity.
You must provide a certified copy of your photo ID or a identity referee declaration form to confirm your identity.
You must provide certified copies of documents that prove the identity of all the child's parents or legal guardians.
You must provide copies of 2 different documents that show either your birth name, married name or new name. These do not need to be certified. Accepted documents include:
You must show your photo ID or completed identity referee declaration to the same person who is authorising your statutory declaration. Sign the identity referee declaration in front of them. They can certify this document at the same time.
You must sign a statutory declaration before a person authorised under the Oaths and Declarations Act. You need to do this in person and show them either your photo ID or an identity referee declaration. They'll also sign your application form.
You need New Zealand citizenship to apply for a passport.
You need a student visa if you want to study full time in New Zealand for more than 3 months.
You need consent from a Family Court Judge before you can marry.
You need the following information:
You need to apply for most benefits online, then meet with a case manager before your application is accepted and you start being paid.
You need to apply to get a congratulatory message. The person or couple celebrating the event can apply, or someone can apply for them.
You need to arrange your licence at least 3 working days before you get married.
You need to be able to hold a basic conversation in English to get New Zealand citizenship.
You need to fill in the application form with both of your parents. Your New Zealand citizen parent needs to include their most recent New Zealand passport number.
You need to get a name change certificate to prove you have changed their name.
You need to get a name change certificate to prove you have changed your name.
You need to get any documents that are not in English translated.
You need to get someone to witness 1 of your passport photos.
You need to include these 3 documents with your application:
You need to make an appeal within 20 working days of receiving the Customs decision. A lawyer or advocate can present your case for you if you want, either in a formal hearing or based on written submissions.
You need to show you are of good character to get New Zealand citizenship.
You need to show you have been physically present in New Zealand for a certain amount of time and that you intend to continue living here.
You need to sign the declaration in front of an authorised person. Check the form for a list of people who can witness your declaration.
You need to tell Births, Deaths and Marriages:
You need to write and ask for your surname to be amended and provide two types of evidence:
You need to write and ask for your surname to be amended.
You only need a separation order if one of you does not want to separate, though you can choose to apply for one together if you both agree.
You only need to provide original name change documents if your name was changed outside of NZ or in some special circumstances.
You or your partner needs to take the notice to your local Registrar of Marriages in person, so they can witness you signing the declaration. The address is on the form.
You pay a 15% goods and services tax (GST) on most of your purchases in New Zealand.
You pay speeding tickets and Police infringement notices, for example for not wearing a seatbelt, directly to the Police.
You pay tax on income from all your savings and investments, whether they're in NZ or overseas. Your tax rate is based on your income.
You should also check if the organisation asking for the document has specific requirements. For example, they may:
You should check to see if you need to do this with the local register office in the country where you intend to get married.
You then pay a set fee of $90 to the celebrant on the day of your ceremony.
You were adopted before 18 November 1992, or you were under 14 years old at the time your adoption was finalised.
You will need to provide the following documentation:
You will not get a charge or use up mobile data if:
You'll need to confirm your details with
Young people aged between 14 and 17 who are charged with a serious offence will go to Youth Court rather than the District Court or High Court. The Youth Court does not deal with murder, manslaughter and traffic offences.
Young people aged between 14 and 18 who are charged with an offence will be directed to a Youth Court rather than the District Court or High Court.
Your New Zealand citizenship status depends on:
Your New Zealand marriage certificate is an official record of your marriage. It costs $33 to have it posted to you. You can order your certificate online.
Your New Zealand marriage or civil union certificate is an official record of your marriage. It costs $33 to get one sent to you.
Your annual holidays are paid at the rate of the greater of your ordinary weekly pay and average weekly earnings.
Your attorney found a few possible options. Two of which she carefully researched, before recommending 1 of them. For each of these, she:
Your authenticated documents will have a covering page on top with a stamp from MFAT. The documents will be tied together with a ribbon and get an official embossed seal. They are then sent to the address you included on your application form.
Your baby's name must not be:
Your birth certificate is the official confirmation that you are New Zealand citizen. To get your certificate, contact
Your care plan after a needs assessment
Your child is a citizen by descent when they are born or adopted, but to get your child a New Zealand passport you must register them.
Your children born outside New Zealand can
Your children who are born outside New Zealand can
Your complaint will be investigated as promptly as possible. Allow several weeks for a decision.
Your documents will be authenticated by the Department of Internal Affairs Authentication Unit, and then sent to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade (MFAT) for verification.
Your emails and contributions to the site may constitute public records and be retained to the extent required by the Public Records Act 2005. DIA may also need to disclose those materials under the Official Information Act 1982 or to a Parliamentary Select Committee or in response to a parliamentary question.
Your health during pregnancy
Your last pay when you leave a job
Your last pay when you retire
Your lawyer or trustee company stores a copy of your will or
Your lawyer will help you to decide if a
Your licence to us for contributions to www.govt.nz
Your mother must sign the form.
Your new birth certificate details
Your new name has to consist of 1 surname and 1 or more other names. If you have religious, philosophical or cultural reasons to have only one name, you need to include a letter of explanation with your application.
Your partner and NZ Superannuation
Your payments start as soon as your application is processed. It usually takes about 3 weeks.
Your personal care and welfare and property
Your personal information
Your previous name and registered sex will not be displayed on the new birth certificate. Your certificate will have a new registration number, but this number will still contain your original year of registration as the first 4 digits.
Your property manager can do the same kinds of things for you as an attorney would under an
Your request should include:
Your rights after being arrested
Your welfare guardian can do the same kinds of things for you as your attorney would under an
Your will gives those you love clarity while they grieve losing you. Your end-of-life wishes in a will can help a lot during an intense time of mourning.
Your will sets out what you want to happen with your estate and other end-of-life wishes.
Your witness must sign the statutory declaration section of the form to confirm they have sighted each original photo ID. They must also certify each photo ID.
Your witness must sign the statutory declaration section of the form to confirm they have sighted your original photo ID. They must also certify your photo ID and documents.
Zero Data gives you free access to government-sponsored websites. This way, money is not a barrier to getting important services and information.
Zero.govt.nz has you covered.
a New Zealand citizen, or
a United Kingdom national, or
a charge or security placed on property owned by someone granted legal aid
a child aged up to 3 years
a citizen of another Commonwealth country, or
a citizen of the Republic of Ireland
a copy of your separation agreement or separation order
a copy will be posted to you and your ex-partner
a court in the country that issued the document.
a danger to you or your child.
a device with internet access and a camera
a doctor or registered counsellor.
a family of settled person visa, or
a list of organisations with contact details
a plain and neutral background.
a proposed image and text using these specifications:
a public register of licensed and qualifying tradespeople
a separate statutory function
a staff member at a Department of Internal Affairs public counter in Auckland, Manukau, Christchurch or Wellington
a statutory declaration that states:
a wide range of education programmes
a work broker to help find the right people
about the disposal of your firearms, other arms items and ammunition.
accept electronic e-apostilles or paper apostilles.
accept multiple original documents, and not notarised copies
accepts your application fee
access to business tools and resources
accessible alternative (TXT 3KB)
acquire military equipment
act in accordance with their role and responsibilities as set out in the Education Act 1989.
add your baby to your Working for Families Tax Credits
administer NCEA for secondary schools
administer New Zealand's science and research activities in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean
administer a fund for land transport research
administer a national strategy on outdoor public access, including walkways
administer and monitor legislation.
administer applications for major infrastructure projects
administer exams for people wanting formal certification as translators and interpreters
administer funding for pre-school services, schools and tertiary providers
administer student allowances and loans
administer the Emissions Trading Scheme and New Zealand Emission Trading Register
administer the contract with the Meteorological Service so they can provide weather forecasts and warnings
administer the rules for overseas investment in sensitive New Zealand assets, ensuring a balance between protecting those assets and facilitating investments that benefit New Zealand.
administering the NZ Oil Pollution Fund.
administering, evaluating and improving the site
advice on what to expect from tradespeople who are doing plumbing, gasfitting and drainlaying work.
advise departments early on in creating policy and laws
advise on and facilitate the creation of the data and evidence infrastructure for social investment
advise on policy and operational regulation
advise on the impact of government policies on ethnic communities and identify opportunities to affect change
advise the Government about the law
advise the Government on the defence of NZ and its interests
advise the Minister of Internal Affairs on matters relating to lotteries.
advise, lead, support and coordinate activities across the public sector
advises the Government on funding and system settings
advising for Government on policy that might affect NZ retirement income
advising the Government on setting the problem gambling levy.
advocate for the collective interests of people who experience mental distress or addiction (or both), and the people who support them.
advocates for system-level changes
after you have changed their name.
after you have changed your name.
aged under 18 and for care-experienced
aged up to 25 in Aotearoa New Zealand.
agree to release identifying information about yourself to any children conceived from your eggs (this is a legal requirement).
agree to release identifying information about yourself to any children conceived from your sperm (this is a legal requirement).
aim to reduce the harm that serious and organised crime, including financial crime, causes in communities
aims to reduce the impact on people and property when natural disasters occur, by protecting homeowners and helping them recover from natural hazard events.
air quality and pollution monitoring
alleged fraud of generally more than $2 million
allocate funds from the National Land Transport Fund to activities on local roads and state highways including passenger transport services
allocation of provisional catch history or quota based on catch history
allowances for people on low-to-middle incomes.
alphabet and its sounds. This can help you when saying everyday words and place names.
also has regional spread through
an European Economic Area (EEA) family permit.
an additional fee of $170 if you also want to change your name
an approved translator, or
an authorised staff member at a New Zealand embassy or consulate
an electronic apostille, called an e-apostille.
an official title or rank, or resemble one (for example, Justice, King, Prince, Princess, Royal)
an official title or rank, or resembles one (for example, Justice, King, Prince, Princess, Royal)
an original or certified copy of your marriage or civil union certificate
analyse what they hear from the communities they visit, alongside nationwide data and other information they collect.
and associated standards and regulations, including the
and confirmation that the
and either you intend to marry a:
and families, are meeting their needs, delivering services effectively, and improving outcomes
and gave it equal legal status to English. The 1987 Act has been replaced by
and include your daytime contact number.
and introduce yourself and where you are from.
and is an autonomous Crown entity, listed under the Crown Entities Act
and look for the PDF form under 'Other ways to apply' at the bottom of the page.
and others who advocate for system change.
and the plan for revitalising the language.
animal and laboratory science
animal care and veterinary nursing
animal control and bylaws
animal control and health regulation
antenatal screening for Down syndrome and other conditions
any actions that you have already taken to resolve the complaint
any copyright in content on Govt.nz is owned by the New Zealand Crown
any other changes to your details.
any time constraints or required dates
any time on weekends and public holidays.
anything else you think is important.
appear in court together, the judge makes the dissolution order and your divorce will be official immediately.
applications and help from the Ministry of Justice.
applications for legal aid, including if an application has been declined
applications for resource consents.
applications or visas, contact Immigration NZ (
applied for an IRD number for your baby, you will receive this after about 15 working days
apply for Best Start payments
apply for New Zealand citizenship
apply for New Zealand citizenship by grant
apply for a New Zealand passport online
apply for a RealMe verified identity and address
apply for a marriage licence
apply for a replacement driver licence
apply for an IRD number for your baby
apply for your child to be granted New Zealand citizenship.
apply to access information about your donor, or people who share your donor.
apply to be granted New Zealand citizenship, or
appoint someone to manage your bank account
appoints and employs public service chief executives
approve place names that already exist unofficially
approving any changes to casino licences
approving clinical trials of new medicines
are 16 or 17 but only if they are, or have been, married or in a civil union or de facto relationship.
are an Australian citizen, or
are entitled to live here indefinitely.
are made when you have mental capacity and are used for long-term purposes, such as appointing an attorney to make decisions for you if you lose your mental capacity.
are not linked to bonds or financial institutions
are responsible for the year-round management of Scott Base
are used for short-term, temporary or specific purposes.
are working hard to process applications as quickly as possible.
around 900 new residential dwellings, to encourage people to live in the central city
around the world, specialising in the Asia Pacific region.
arrange reinsurance or other risk transfer products in respect of all or part of
arranged for you to also have a tour.
art galleries and museums
art gallery and heritage centre.
as an official language of
as partners with the Crown to protect, promote and support the revitalisation of
assess and audit the New Zealand Defence Force functions, duties and projects.
assess and report publicly on:
assess visa applications from people who wish to visit, work, study, or live permanently here
assesses and investigates complaints made about accredited providers or services
assessing people who wish to adopt children and reports to the Family Court on adoption applications
assist an executor of a will
assist government departments in reviews of the law and are regularly called upon to assist Parliamentary select committees
assist other NZ government agencies.
at any level. Learn how to get translations and how to become a translator.
at home with your other important documents.
at least 1 of your biological parents had a New Zealand resident visa or permit, and
attracting international keynote speakers and experts to speak at New Zealand conferences and forums.
audio recording of comments.
audit regimes for accreditation of building consent authorities
auditing and licensing medicine manufacturers.
automotive, transport, warehousing and logistics
available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
be a source of information about Auckland.
be the same, similar or different?
be viewing the site in bright sunlight
be with you when you give birth
became fully operational when the Water Services Act 2021 was passed.
before 1 January 1949 you legally married someone who meets eligibility criteria 1.
before 1 January 1949 you legally married someone who meets eligibility criteria 3.
behave as a responsible New Zealander.
being able to use them without relying solely on their colour
benefits for people unable to support themselves
biosecurity and biodiversity management
biosecurity and public health surveillance
biosecurity, including animal and plant pest control
birth certificates from before someone changed their registered sex.
birth certificates from before someone was adopted
birth of a deceased person who died at least 50 years ago, or who was born at least 80 years ago
birth of a living person who was born at least 100 years ago
birth records that are at least 100 years old
birthday, contact the Congratulatory Messages team and they will make sure the person receives the King
birthdays of 100 years and over
books, magazines and newspapers, and
both stop when you cancel them. They are automatically invalid when you die
bought-in-store will kits.
build trusted, competitive and effectively regulated markets
building and environmental health regulation
building and resource consents
building consents & information
built environment including quantity surveying, architectural technology, construction management and supervision
business administration and computing
business and administration
business and community support
business assets worth over $100 million
business that offers free Wi-Fi to its customers.
by giving written notice to your attorney and successor attorney.
by giving written notice to your attorneys and successor attorneys.
by their name or what they do in government.
by their name, political party or electorate.
can travel on a New Zealand passport
cannot register details from a family member or friend of a donor or donor-conceived person. The information must be registered by the person themselves.
cannot use public transport.
cannot usually be used on their own as proof of identity.
care for 48 nationally significant heritage properties
care for New Zealand memorials, monuments, war graves and symbols of national identity.
career practitioners, such as teachers and career advisers.
carrying out audits, studies and inquiries
catchment management, including flood protection and control works
celebrate Pacific business success through various events, celebrations and initiatives
central campuses - NZ Maritime School, MIT Queen Street (both in Auckland city)
certificate of approval or licence issued by the Private Security Personnel Licensing Authority
certifies your documents.
certifying seafarers and registering ships
change colours, contrast levels, fonts and text size
change place names (eg correct spelling)
change your name or gender on your passport
change, replace or cancel your
changing the colour of visited links
charged too much for their service.
check and make submissions on Bills presented to Parliament.
check for help with funeral or
check if you are eligible for citizenship.
check these rules are being complied with and take action if they find that they are not
check with the overseas organisation for any specific requirements, such as any extra forms, payments or courier bags.
check your application is in order and complies with the Employment Relations Act 2000
check your complaint meets the criteria, and
checked and carry-on baggage.
checking that the organisations which support and work with
checking the accuracy of weight and/or measure in pre-packaged or catch-weight goods (eg checking that pre-packaged meat is the advertised weight)
checks your application form
children of a donor who were not donor-conceived.
choose a final resting place
choosing your attorney and their responsibilities
citizen of another Commonwealth country, or
citizen of the Republic of Ireland
citizen or ordinarily resident here
citizen or permanent resident, you may be able to get free or subsidised pregnancy care.
citizen or resident, or you care for a child who is a resident and present in
citizens and permanent residents get free pregnancy care unless you choose a private obstetrician or private sonographer.
citizenship or resident status
civil defence & emergency
civil defence and rural fire
civil defence emergency management
clear, sharp and in focus.
clearly write which documents need to be apostilled or authenticated.
closely related by birth, marriage or adoption
cluster reviews of education institutions and services
coastal and harbour management
coastal navigation and safety
collect blood from volunteers
collect excise duty from tobacco, alcohol and fuel manufacturers in NZ.
collect fines and reparation
collect foreign intelligence that has a bearing on NZ
collect intelligence relevant to security
collect money from customs duties and GST on items coming in and out of NZ
collect road user charges and other revenue
collect the levy for the insurance provided under the
commission or carry out research to support quality teaching.
communicate decisions about their personal care and welfare.
communication and marketing
communications and writing
communities in emergencies and disasters.
communities the power to decide how they invest in
community and economic development
community and health services
community and student radio stations
community development and neighbourhood support.
community halls, libraries and pools
complaint forms if you have a complaint about a plumber, gasfitter, or drainlayer
complete an application form
complete survey or feedback forms
computing & information technology
conduct inquiries and make recommendations in relation to security clearances.
conducting safety inspections of all NZ and foreign-flagged ships calling at NZ ports
conducting user research if you registered to participate.
connect businesses with national and international experts
connect international businesses and investors with high-value growth opportunities in New Zealand.
connecting with smaller companies who deliver power to homes and businesses
consent from a parent or guardian
considering suggestions for changes to districts or regions
considers applications for exemptions from the Code
construction including carpentry, plumbing, electrical, painting and decorating
consult on key policy developments
consult with the community about food safety issues
consult with you, your carers, family members, your other attorneys, successor attorneys and your welfare guardian.
consumer engagement: Partners in care
contact the fertility clinic directly for information, if it is known, or
contribute to or lead peace and security operations in the South Pacific
contribute to peacekeeping missions.
contribute to whole-of-government efforts at home and abroad in resource protection, disaster relief, and humanitarian assistance.
contributing to a socially just and equitable education system
controlling pest animals and plants
controlling pest plants and pest animals
controlling pests and disease
coordinate and train conservation volunteers
coordinate international education policy
coordinating responses to major marine pollution spills
create awareness of the opportunities and challenges of New Zealand's ageing population.
creative arts and industries
creative industries and technologies
cross-social system advice and support for the social sector with cross system work
culture, learn some words and their meanings.
date of the birth or wedding
deal with competence and discipline issues in teachers
death records that are at least 50 years old, or
debts, loans or liabilities
decide complaints about broadcasters
decides you do not have the mental capacity to make decisions about your personal care and welfare or to communicate your decisions.
deductions from your income
deed poll certificate, change of name certificate, or birth certificate showing both names, or
deed poll or statutory declaration.
defence force or police service photo identity card
defend NZ on the sea (for example, supporting fishery patrols)
deliver campaigns that challenge antisocial attitudes and behaviour.
deliver innovation programmes, training and workshops
delivering property data/insights
delivering services and consultancy in over 65 countries.
delivers cyber-security uplift to Pacific Islands nations
description: 15-20 words maximum.
details about your enquiry.
detect and apprehend offenders
develop and administer food standards
develop and share solutions that can be used again
develop and support high-performing science and innovation
develop initiatives to raise public awareness and support for part-time military service and NZDF youth programmes.
develop land transport rules and the official New Zealand road code
develop the best systems for dairy, sheep, beef and deer farming
develop, implement and promote strategies for tourism
developing a financial reporting strategy for New Zealand
developing and monitoring maritime safety rules and marine protection rules
developing business ventures based on the land
developing consumer policy including consumer protection
developing management capability and governance skills within the sector
did not meet your expectations
did not properly carry out their duties as requested by you
digital platforms such as QV costbuilder and SalesDirect.
discharge their obligations as an ally of Australia
disciplining or prosecuting when required.
discretionary investment managed scheme (DIMS) providers
dispose of your firearms and ammunition as required by law
dispute resolution schemes
disputes over business contracts or debts
disrupts cyber-security attacks
distribution of income, grants and scholarships
does regular user research to ensure that integrating information into Govt.nz actually makes things easier for people.
dog control and registration
dog registration / animal control
doing quality assurance reviews of work done on behalf of the Auditor-General.
donations made outside New Zealand
donations which did not result in a birth
draft Government bills and Legislative Instruments
early childhood education
economic and community development
economic development and tourism
educate and engage workplaces about health and safety, hazardous substances and energy safety
educating the maritime community about best practice in safety and environmental standards
education and social sciences
educational certificate or school report
electricity transmission and distribution
electrotechnology, engineering and welding
eligibility to receive provisional catch history or fishing quota
email and phone facilities
emergencies in other developing countries.
emergency management, and
empower ethnic communities to achieve their aspirations.
enables participants to comply with their Code obligations
encourage New Zealanders to get involved in conservation and to get out and enjoy activities on conservation land
encourage good administration in government by giving feedback and training to agencies.
encourage the uptake of renewable energy
encourage young Pacific entrepreneurs through joint initiatives with secondary and tertiary education providers.
end-of-life wishes, such as funeral,
enforce breaches of immigration law and ensure that people who are not allowed to remain in New Zealand leave when they are supposed to
enforce the law on anti-spam, censorship, gambling, anti-money laundering and countering financing of terrorism
enforcement of conditions placed on a grant
enforces the Takeovers Code to ensure that Code-regulated transactions are transparent and equitable
enforcing the Weights and Measures Act 1987.
engineering, construction and infrastructure
enhance cooperation between and collaborate with law enforcement and other relevant government organisations to plan and conduct national and international operations.
enhance the value of NZ's natural resources
ensure academic quality assurance
ensure safe and fair workplaces
ensure that businesses have access to the skills they need and that current and future demand for skills is met
ensure the food produced is safe
ensure the integrity and confidentiality of government information
ensures State services are delivered in the most efficient and effective way.
ensuring that every learner receives what they need to be successful, and to improve outcomes in the tertiary education system as a whole.
ensuring that relevant port facilities and New Zealand ships meet the requirements of the Maritime Security Act 2004 and various international rules
ensuring the safety of general consumer products being offered for sale or supply in NZ are safe
entitled to live in New Zealand indefinitely.
entitlements to benefits, New Zealand Superannuation, supplementary assistance and social housing
environmental health and building control
environmental information and monitoring
environmental management systems, including laws, regulations and national environmental standards
environmental monitoring and restoration
eople with visual impairments may have difficulty reading the content.
establish and maintain the rules that all pilots, engineers, aircraft operators, airlines and aerodromes follow to keep flying safe
ethnicity and any relevant cultural affiliation
events centre, libraries and pools
evidence that supports your complaint, if available
examine and monitor the treatment of people in places of detention eg in prisons, immigration detention facilities, and secure care in hospitals
examining how proposed legislation could affect individual privacy.
expert leadership advice.
explain food issues eg labelling, additives, chemicals
face-to-face or virtual appointments with government and community services
facilitate digital transformation.
facilitate research and education, and contribute to the sharing of information, knowledge and expertise on natural hazard risks, impacts and resilience
family doctors who provide maternity care
family income level that determine if you can or cannot get Best Start after your child turns 1 and 2 years of age.
file size: aim for 50KB and no more than 100KB
file your tax returns, work with your accountant and Inland Revenue
filling out a complaint form online or sending them the complaint form by fax, email or post
films and video recordings
financial help if you're on a lower income
financial product markets (such as NZX)
finding and applying for teaching jobs
fisheries and aquaculture.
fit-for-purpose plants and animals
flood and land management
focus on the stories and lived experiences of
food safety investigation
for personal care and welfare and you cannot make or communicate decisions for yourself, your family can apply to the family court:
for personal care and welfare are described here.
for personal care and welfare do not apply to a property
for personal care and welfare only starts if you lose your mental capacity.
for personal care and welfare.
for property are described here. For everything else see:
for property does not include these instructions and your attorney does not have a firearms licence, your attorney must dispose of your firearms, other arms items and ammunition in an appropriate manner, as follows:
for property has some important differences from an
for property. Consider having a different attorney for each type of
for the activation of the
for your personal care and welfare.
forecasts for NZ towns and cities, rural areas and national parks
foreign draft (only available if you apply at the Sydney office).
forensic science (eg crime scene investigation)
forestry and forestry rights
form from the Ministry of Justice website or ask for a copy from wherever you get your
form is all correctly filled out and signed, it becomes your enduring power of attorney legal document.
form online from the Ministry of Justice or ask for a copy wherever you get your
forms part of the heritage of our country.
foster collaborative projects and share knowledge about technology and innovation
foundation and youth guarantee
fraud so complicated that it needs special skills and resources to investigate it
free access to workshops and selected NZQA recognised courses.
from Polynesia in the 13th century and created a new language and culture.
full names of the person or couple, as they appear on their birth or marriage certificate
function and provides system stewardship of public-service information security
fund community service providers
fund the delivery of emergency housing
funding organisations to support communities to protect and help children
gather and analyse data to inform decision-making in the education sector.
gave BDM permission to tell the MSD about the birth of your child, MSD may contact you to talk about any changes to your benefit.
general identity declaration form, and
genetically improve livestock
geographical indications.
get an apostille or authentication certificate for your marriage certificate, or
give accreditation to laboratories.
give advice to the Government and the tourism industry.
give awards and fellowships.
give grants funding to health researchers
give out profits from the New Zealand Lotteries Commission
give places official names
give the serial numbers of the firearms
gives confidential and reliable advice about medical problems, and where you can get help
gives general health information.
giving stakeholders insights from research.
goods and services tax (GST)
government agencies (eg the Department of Conservation)
government services, for example, paying your car registration.
grants and subsidies to encourage employers to provide work
grapegrowing and wine science
grapegrowing and winemaking
guarantee the risk of non-payment on any of their credits, loans or bonds.
guardian responsibilities
guidance and training on best practice
had a visa that allowed them to reside in New Zealand indefinitely.
hairdressing, beauty and make-up artistry
halls, airfields and libraries
handle complaints and investigates the administrative conduct of state sector agencies, including in relation to official information requests (OIAs)
handling complaints, investigations, and recalls of medicines and medical devices, and
has 4 new functions that:
has local websites to help you with health services in your area.
has more information about surrogacy on their website:
has no effect and your attorney has no power to make decisions until your
has no further authority and your will takes effect instead.
have a Body Mass Index in the healthy range
have a New Zealand passport or have a job that is listed below.
have a presence on a number of international forums and specialist networks relating to Antarctica.
have a purpose to mobilise New Zealanders to be world leaders in clean and clever energy use
have a say in how your child is raised
have agreed on the care of your children.
have an illness or disability
have at least 1 parent who was a New Zealand citizen by birth or grant when you were born.
have contact with your child (unless a court rules otherwise)
have full access to education
have full economic and social rights
have health advice for pregnancy, such as:
have known you for more than 1 year, and
have printed a page in black and white.
have your marriage certificate translated into another language.
hazardous substances, chemicals or cosmetics
health and social practice
health and social services including alcohol and drug counselling, health and wellbeing
health quality intelligence
hear appeals against licensing decisions made by the Registrar
hear appeals against provisional local alcohol policies
hearing appeals against decisions
hearing appeals to do with ward or constituency boundaries.
hearing complaints about how
help NZ businesses grow without damaging the environment.
help New Zealand businesses succeed through technology
help Pacific communities and government agencies communicate.
help a child cope with the death of a parent
help exporters of all sizes make better decisions and connect to the right partners
help food businesses understand the Food Standards Code.
help industries work safely with hazardous substances
help make our location-based information easy to find, share and use
help migrants to settle into New Zealand
help people to access and use the collective knowledge of the nation and make information readily available
help people to reach an agreement that works for both parties.
help resolve employment issues related to territorial and cadet force personnel
help schools function by providing property, transport and information technology services
help to find a way through a problem that may not seem immediately apparent
help with creating a will
help with estate management
help with search and rescue operations
helping businesses to understand their markets and to identify opportunities for growth and collaboration
helping people access information about past adoptions.
helping to keep the banking, finance company and insurance sectors running smoothly
helping young people accept responsibility for their offending and supporting them so they do not re-offend
helplines, counselling and support services
helps businesses manage employee injuries, while encouraging safer workplaces
helps health providers to register with us, lodge and manage claims and invoice us.
helps you take the first steps
hold a New Zealand resident visa or permit, or
hold a current Australian Resident Return Visa.
hold collections of research material
hold tenancy bonds in trust until the end of a tenancy.
horticulture and animal care
household census register from an Asian country and a letter or resident permit / visa from Immigration New Zealand confirming resident status.
household census register from an Asian country and a letter or valid resident permit/visa from Immigration New Zealand confirming resident status.
how long a property manager is appointed for
how long you have been living with that gender identity.
how many property managers you need
humanities and social sciences
identify and develop Auckland-specific policies that will promote Auckland and national economic growth
identifying links to external websites.
if any donor-conceived persons have been born, and their gender for $15.30; or
if you are not part of the couple, your full name and your relationship to the couple
if your child can show a link to New Zealand
if your child has family living in New Zealand who are citizens
if your child has longstanding family or whakapapa ties to New Zealand
image size: 500px x 281px
impose special conditions for an extended supervision order
improve or simplify their experience when dealing with government
improve primary sector productivity
improve the online experience of government
improve the overall performance of the transport system
improve the responsiveness of the public sector to the needs of ethnic communities
improvements to the traffic network, to make it easier to move around the city by car, bike, or on foot.
improving leadership and capability
improving the consistency of vocational education and training
in New Zealand on or after 1 January 2006 to parents who were not New Zealand citizens or permanent residents.
in email notifications or alerts
in hard copy publications
in pregnancy can stop it transferring to your baby.
in the United Kingdom, or
include the details of a suitable person, persons, or organisation to be contacted to take possession of your firearms, other arms items and ammunition
include their name and signature
includes powers such as buying and selling real estate, managing rental properties, buying insurance, making financial transactions in your name and collecting any debts due.
includes your health and wellbeing, where and how you live, if you need to be in full-time care, your general welfare and enjoyment of life.
income support to help people get into, and stay in work
increase sustainable resource use
increasing the employment participation of key groups of women
indicate if you want to gift, donate or sell the items, or surrender them to New Zealand Police for destruction
infection prevention and control
inform and influence decision-making
information about all donor-conceived persons (if they have consented) related to the donor for $40.80.
information about exactly what happened before, during and after the marriage or civil union
information about how and where they died.
information about the health of the environment.
information for overseas trained teachers wanting to work in New Zealand.
information is kept about the donor
insights, tools, and practices that improve cross social system decision making for improving wellbeing.
international agreements (eg United Nations missions, regional security operations)
international institutions.
invest in the next generation of Pacific leaders who will make a long-lasting difference in the private and public sectors across the region
investigate and analyse cyber incidents against NZ critical infrastructure
investigate and hear complaints about the conduct of Licensed Building Practitioners (LBPs)
investigate people giving immigration advice without a licence or exemption
investigate serious wrongdoing and other serious breaches.
investigate topics given to us by the Government (eg housing affordability, local government regulation)
investigates and reports on matters relating to departmental performance.
investigating and analysing maritime accidents and accident trends
investigating and responding to weights and measures complaints from consumers and business
investigating complaints about breaches of privacy
involved in the other responsibilities of raising children.
is 1 of 3 official languages in
is a blessing or prayer often said at the beginning of a gathering or sharing of food.
is a free training course for highly-proficient speakers to become qualified translators and interpreters.
is a government authentication and identity verification service.
is a type of greeting and introduction. You can learn your
is about your health, wellbeing and enjoyment of life. It may include, for example:
is activated because you do not have the mental capacity to take care of your property yourself, your attorney must contact
is activated due to your mental incapacity.
is appropriate for your situation.
is clear about what you want done and who will do it.
is dedicated to fostering strong, ongoing and effective relationships with
is for. You decide if you want an
is if a suitably qualified medical practitioner:
is no longer valid and your attorneys lose the authority they had under your
is not just for elderly people. Anyone over the age of 18 should consider creating an
is separate from your will. When you die, the
is staffed by registered nurses
is the best option for your situation.
is the national anti-doping agency and is responsible for enforcing the Sports Anti-doping Rules through testing and investigation
is to ensure sport and recreation in New Zealand is safer and fairer.
issue driver licences and transport service licences
issue licences to people who are fit and competent to give immigration advice
issuing competence certificates.
issuing practice certificates
issuing practicing certificates.
it must be in writing and signed by both of you
keep forests safe from pests, weeds and disease
kits can be an option for some people. These are, for example:
know if any of your details have changed, so they can make sure your child support is still correct.
know the common reactions to grief, and ways to support kids, by age group
know what they need to do and how to do it.
language from 1200 to present day.
lead an ongoing review of social sector spending to measure outcomes.
lead government's ICT strategy.
lead national security planning, which includes civil defence.
lead the National Road Safety Committee, working towards safer roads, vehicles, drivers and speeds
lead work to improve housing affordability, and provide employment, residential tenancy, and unit titles dispute resolution services.
leading the Strategy for Financial Capability
leading thinking and shaping the future of education.
lease or tenancy agreement
leave instructions for funeral and memorial services.
leave the UK within 6 months, or
legal studies and law enforcement
let organisations know about the death
let traders register with them and manage their registration online
lets people tab between links
letter from Immigration New Zealand confirming resident status
liaising with national and international organisations that have similar standard setting functions
libraries, pools and indoor facilities
license early childhood education providers
licensing casino operators and venues
licensing of people and companies working in the real estate industry
link ethnic communities with government
literacy and numeracy education
live in New Zealand indefinitely
living together in a de facto relationship when your baby was born.
local music and music promotion
local platforms and services like HEIHEI, NZ On Screen and ABLE captioning.
local roads and footpaths
local roads, footpaths and street lighting
longer than 100 characters, including spaces
longer than 70 characters, including spaces
look after regional parks, including pest management.
look after tracks, tramping huts and campgrounds on conservation land
looking after regional parks, including pest management.
looking after the land, air, freshwater, and coast, and
looking at the quality of practice and identifying areas for improvement across the wider
low-cost housing through central government or your local council.
mail and courier services
maintain competency standards and a code of conduct for immigration advisers
maintain the New Zealand Heritage list
maintain the Register of Radio Frequencies designed to facilitate spectrum engineering and trading
maintain the list of both registered traders and banned traders.
maintaining aviation infrastructure around the country
maintaining the NZ Marine Oil Spill Response Strategy and National Contingency Plan
major new public facilities like the Convention Centre and the Metro Sports Facility, that will encourage locals and visitors into the central city
make a credible contribution in support of peace and security in the Asia-Pacific region
make a postponement order
make it clear they have seen all the pages in a document (e.g. by marking every page).
make recommendations to improve the approaches to mental health and wellbeing
make rules regulating the conduct of these lotteries, and
make sure government policy is done legally
make sure land is sustainably managed
make sure people in prison and offenders in the community serve their sentences
make sure that public sector organisations are spending public resources well and making good decisions.
make sure the death is registered within
make sure the operations of the executive government are done according to the law.
make what government does easier to understand
makes sure accredited providers consistently meet the laws, rules and regulations of the trust framework
makes use of its domestic and international networks to facilitate information exchanges within sectors, share information with trusted partners, and support our cyber-security work in New Zealand.
making recommendations to the Minister of Local Government
making sure medicines meet safety, quality and performance standards
making sure the workers meet a specific standard
manage and account for the funds invested in transport
manage and develop property holdings for rail operations and appropriate third-party land use.
manage and improve forests
manage driver testing services
manage national advertising and education programmes
manage our Crown land, river and lake beds, administering high country pastoral leases, and Crown forestry licenses on land held for Treaty settlements
manage our survey and title transactions to provide confidence in our property rights system
manage passports, citizenship, name changes, and birth, death, marriage and civil union registration and certificates
manage permits and licences for hunters and fishers, and for companies that want to carry out business on conservation land, eg kayaking tour groups
manage the Crown's buildings within the parliamentary area
manage the National Heritage Preservation Incentive Fund.
manage the New Zealand Qualifications Framework, from certificates to PhDs
manage the New Zealand refugee programme.
manage the environmental impact of activities in the EEZ, including prospecting for petroleum and minerals, seismic surveying and scientific research.
manage vehicle certification, registration and licensing
manage your business, employees, suppliers, customers, business assets and property
manage your money and bank accounts
manages the accreditation mark for the digital identity services trust framework.
managing NZ's power system so that electricity is delivered whenever and wherever needed.
managing and protecting the environment from the adverse effects of resource use
managing day-to-day and routine tasks in your home
managing over 1 million traffic movements per year
managing the Rescue Coordination Centre New Zealand search and rescue response service
managing the list of vaccines, medicines and devices that get subsidised in the community (part of the cost is paid by government so it is cheaper for the user)
managing the use of the natural environment (air, land, fresh water, coastal waters)
managing which hospital medicines are funded, and national contracts for some devices used in public hospitals.
marine and environmental studies
marine forecasts, warnings and tide information
marketing and promoting NZ films and filmmakers both here and overseas.
marriage records that are at least 80 years old
marriage that occurred at least 75 years ago
married or in a civil union at any time from when your baby was conceived until their birth, or
matches the tone of the content
material with high production values gets funded
maximise export opportunities
may provide free antenatal classes. Talk to your
medical history, if considered significant by the clinic.
meet the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (
meeting the needs of the regions of New Zealand and their learners, industries, employers and communities
members of local authorities and community boards.
mental health and addiction quality improvement
minimising the effects of pollution from ships offshore oil and gas platforms
minor offences such as disorderly behaviour.
missing and you have tried to find them, or
monitor and enforce compliance with the Residential Tenancies Act 1986
monitor and enforce compliance with the law, and
monitor how NZ is promoting and protecting all persons with disabilities under the UN Disabilities Convention
monitor mental health and addiction services and advocate improvements to those services
monitor the aviation safety performance of each size of aircraft
monitor the performance of transport Crown entities
monitor travellers arriving in New Zealand without the required documents
monitoring and managing water quality and quantity issues
monitoring compliance with the
monitoring reactions to medicines and medical devices
monitoring system performance and using an outcomes-based approach for
monitoring the marketplace for emerging product safety risks and issues and responding to consumer complaints relating to unsafe goods.
monitoring the quality of retail fuel in NZ (diesel, petrol and bio-fuels)
monitoring their training
monitors and manages the financial affairs of the Government, including the Budget and the Financial Statements of the Government
monitors health outcomes.
monitors places where young people are detained.
monitors the performance of commercial entities owned by the Crown
more than 3 working days before you get married.
motor vehicle registration
museum, libraries, pools, community halls and iSite Customer Service Centre
museums, libraries and pools
must be created with help from either a lawyer, a qualified legal executive, or an authorised officer or employee of a trustee corporation.
national cervical screening
national direction through national policy statements and strategies
national evaluations on education topics
natural event risk management eg floods.
navigate the website using just a keyboard, switch, or speech recognition software
need the car to get to work
negotiate new outdoor public access.
new public spaces - gardens, parks, and gathering spaces that make the central city greener, and easier and more enjoyable to move around
newborn metabolic screening
no earlier than 3 months before the event
no later than 6 months after the event.
non-relatives, such as doctors and social workers.
not act in a way that is against the interests of New Zealand
not appear in court, the court will check your forms and make the dissolution order. Your divorce will take effect 1 month after the date the order is made
not be your relative or partner
not live at the same address as you
not married or in a civil union or de facto relationship
not-for-profit organisations.
notify the Ministry of Social Development (MSD) of the birth of your baby, if you get a benefit.
now, with the integration of
number. If you're not sure, contact
nursing, midwifery and medical imaging
nutrients and supplements
obey and promote the laws of New Zealand
obligations to pay maintenance or superannuation, and
obstetricians (doctors who specialise in pregnancy and childbirth).
occupational health and safety
occupational regulation of registered valuers, and
of the burial or cremation
of unsound mind or unable to act because of a medical condition.
offer a farm management service.
offer a range of loans which are not available in the private sector
offer a range of research and development grants.
offer educational support, advice and materials
offer live-streaming of these networks as well as on-demand programmes from their website
office administration and computing
official information requests (OIA)
official practice and policy
on the name change form, or
on this or any other website
only accept documents that were recently issued
only if a suitably qualified medical practitioner decides you do not have the mental capacity to manage your money, property and other assets.
only if a suitably qualified medical practitioner decides you do not have the mental capacity to manage your property.
opera and ballet productions
operate and improve the state highway network
operating 2 radar centres in Auckland and Christchurch
operating monetary policy, eg by setting the Official Cash Rate (OCR) to keep prices stable
options for getting citizenship.
options to help with your legal costs
or have 50 or more shareholders and 50 or more share parcels and is at least medium-sized.
ordered a birth certificate, this will be sent to you by your choice of standard post or courier
originals, or if copies are accepted
other Working for Families tax credits, including Best Start.
other birth certificate and a letter or valid resident permit / visa from Immigration New Zealand confirming resident status
other birth certificate with a letter or valid resident permit / visa from Immigration New Zealand confirming resident status
other dependent children in care
other donor-conceived persons related to the same donor.
other passport with a valid Australian permanent resident permit / visa
other passport with a valid residence permit / visa issued by Immigration New Zealand
other passport with a valid residence permit / visa issued by Immigration New Zealand and a birth certificate
other things like your screen resolution and the language setting of your browser.
overseas electoral agencies
overseas with no delivery address or contact details
oversee a code of responsible conduct
overseeing the construction regulatory system, including the Building Act and the Building Code
own and operate a national network which meets the needs of its customers
parks, playgrounds and camping grounds
parks, reserves and sportsfields
parks, swimming pools and sports grounds
parks, walkways and sports fields
parks, walkways and sportsfields
participate in user research.
pay for some legal help to cover specific areas of wills and estates
pay your bills, your mortgage and other debts
paying for doctor visits and prescriptions
paying for long-term care in a rest home or hospital
payment of costs awarded to an opponent in a civil case.
people who are in positions of high public interest
permits, food & licensing
personal care and welfare
personal or health information requests
plan future use of the radio spectrum
planning & resource consents
planning the work for the organisation
plant variety rights, and
police practices, policies and procedures.
pool and sports stadium and gym
postgraduate qualifications.
practical support for people with the right experience to start a business.
preferred names of the person or couple celebrating the event
preparing and issuing accounting standards
preparing and issuing climate standards and non-binding guidance on non-financial reporting.
preparing and issuing standards for assurance practitioners
pressure injury prevention
prevent user preferences from changing the default text size. P
primary, secondary and tertiary learners
produce several safety publications and run safety training courses and seminars.
professional and administrative services.
professional cookery and hospitality
project and career development
promote alignment, collaboration, and communication between entities involved in mental health and wellbeing
promote digital capability in government.
promote investment in the mineral estate.
promote the benefits of conservation.
promote the involvement of central government in major regional development projects
promote the wellbeing of older people, and
promote, organise and conduct lotteries
promotes public understanding of takeovers law.
promoting responsible use of medicines
property management services
property, money and other possessions
prosecute people for serious workplace health and safety failures.
protect and manage native plants, insects and animals
protect from biological risk.
proverbs and are an important part of
provide a certified copy of an acceptable photo identification (ID).
provide a direction on how funding decisions should be made.
provide a location-based reference system to enable accurate positioning of land and sea features
provide administrative and support services to the House of Representatives and to members of Parliament
provide advice on arts, culture, heritage, sport and recreation, and broadcasting
provide advice on radio spectrum matters, including legislation, licensing and licence compliance
provide advice to government on matters relating to national security
provide advice to people who want to report serious wrongdoing in their workplace eg unlawful, or corrupt behaviour (whistle-blowers)
provide an Auckland perspective in the development of central government policy
provide and support rail passenger services in metropolitan areas, and long distance services for both domestic and tourist markets
provide broadcast content to partner organisations.
provide care throughout your pregnancy
provide care to you and your baby for 4 to 6 weeks after the birth.
provide data about the charities sector for the public, researchers and policy makers
provide disability support services, and equipment and modification services
provide employment support, income support, entitlements and superannuation services
provide ferry services (forming the 'bridge' between the North and South Islands) for rail and road freight, and for passengers and their vehicles
provide for the transport of bulk and consolidated freight
provide further details about the firearms, other arms items and ammunition, as requested by
provide information about travel times and traffic conditions.
provide information and advice on how people can use energy more wisely.
provide information for visitors to conservation land and manage visitor bookings
provide information on your rights and responsibilities as a landlord or tenant
provide information to add to the register
provide information to the public
provide information, codes, and guidance tools for workers and employers
provide leadership on outdoor public access issues
provide mediation services to help landlords and tenants talk about problems with tenancies
provide online resources like
provide policy advice on key issues for Pacific peoples.
provide professional leadership
provide protective security advice to government agencies
provide scientists and engineers, advice and facilities to help with technology and product development
provide sector coordination
provide social housing assessments and services
provide special education services
provide technical input into government standards policies to help with export trade
provide tours, education and information services for the public.
provide treatment programmes, education, job training and support to rehabilitate people and reduce the likelihood of them re-offending.
provides a complaints service available to everybody, from high performance to grassroots. The service is free, confidential and independent.
provides advice and guidance to government and other agencies
provides cyber-security information and educational resources
provides disability system leadership across the government.
provides information about local health services, including general practitioners (GPs or family doctors) and hospitals
provides information, resources, tools and education
provides reports to Ministers, which are:
providing a Marine Pollution Response Service, with a dedicated team of trained oil spill response experts
providing a coastal maritime safety and distress radio service
providing air traffic control and engineering training
providing air traffic control at main city and regional airports, and NZ military bases
providing and operating lighthouses and other aids to navigation for ships on the NZ coast
providing drinking water to the region
providing education and guidance for consumers and businesses on consumer laws and issues
providing independent, expert advice to the Government on mitigating climate change and adapting to the effects of climate change
providing information to consumers.
providing residential and care services for children who need care and protection and for young people who offend
public transport and transport planning
public transport planning and funding.
public works eg energy projects, hospitals, schools
publish a list of all active licences and manager's certificates in New Zealand.
publish and research broadcasting standards.
publish legislation online and in printed form
publish regularly updated information about the activities, finances and people involved in registered charities
publish such material in any media and in any format, including:
puts together information about the threat landscape to share with partners
qualifying financial entities
quantum of reported eligible catch.
radiation safety and emergency response
rain radar, satellite imagery and weather maps
rating, market and asset valuations and advice
reCAPTCHA security and privacy
read the most recent audit reports
read the standard explanation for personal care and welfare document.
recall an offender to prison
receive complaints from people who have received poor immigration advice.
receives reports of, and responds to, cyber-security incidents
recognise overseas qualifications for those who plan to work or study in New Zealand.
recommendations for commendations
recommends reform to takeovers law
record the physical features of our natural and built environments to provide up-to-date maps and information
recovery of social welfare debts.
recreation areas, libraries and pools
recreation centre, library and pool
recreation centres and libraries
recreation centres, libraries and pools
recreation facilities, libraries and pools
reduce the number of government websites
refer disputes that cannot be resolved at mediation to the Tenancy Tribunal
refuse to be the executor.
regional and district statements and plans
regional gardens, Yarrow Stadium and Port Taranaki ownership.
regional land transport planning.
regional transport matters
register and fertility clinics
register and monitor charities
register as a citizen by descent
register as citizens by descent
register details about money owed in the PPSR (including details of who the money is owed to)
registered medical professional.
registering electrical workers
registering new social workers
registry office in Auckland, Wellington or Christchurch
regulate new organisms (plants, animals, GM organisms) and hazardous substances and chemicals
regulate the modification of archaeological sites
regulates the health system
regulating the region's natural resources
release an offender on compassionate grounds.
release non-identifying information to potential recipients to help them choose who to use as a sperm donor
remove details from the PPSR when the debt has been repaid.
renew or replace a current or expired passport
renewing practice certificates for social workers already registered
rent, board or a home loan with an accommodation allowance
replace a lost, stolen or damaged passport.
reporting and giving advice to Parliament
reporting concerns you have about health and disability services
reporting on sector trends and innovations.
represent New Zealand in sports.
represent New Zealand internationally in aviation and maritime issues.
represent New Zealand's position in the international coordination of radio spectrum use
represent the Government in court
represent you if you get a benefit or pension from Work and Income
research issues that help improve productivity.
reserves, parks and sportsfields
reset your RealMe password
resident or you have not lived here for long enough.
residential care services
resilience of food production under a changing climate
resolve issues of interference
resolves issues and complaints about poor behaviour in sport and recreation like bullying, racism and abuse
resolving disputes about the use of the Building Code
resource and building consents
resource consenting/compliance
resource consents for air, land and water use
resource consents for building and water use
resource consents for using natural resources
responding to and investigating complaints about the quality of retail fuel in NZ
responding to distress calls and beacon activations
responding to the majority of the findings of the Canterbury Earthquake Royal Commission that are related to the construction regulatory system
responding to your feedback and information provided in forms and surveys
responsibilities of raising children
responsible for the day-to-day care of children
restraining or non-contact orders.
retailers in NZ and overseas.
review decisions about licences to sell alcohol and to issue manager's certificates
review names for Crown protected areas (eg national parks).
review the law and processes in specific areas selected by it or referred to it by our Minister
reviews market practice and undertakes policy development
reviews the performance of public service chief executives
revitalisation initiatives in their respective
roads, footpaths, cycleways
romoting the importance of long term thinking by:
rubbish and recycling management
rubbish, recycling and landfill
rubbish, recycling and landfills
run Radio New Zealand International (RNZI), an overseas shortwave service, broadcasting to the South Pacific and beyond
run a comprehensive programme of public awareness and education activities
run health ethics committees
run radio spectrum auctions.
run training programmes for Pacific farmers and small and medium-sized businesses, and
running education programmes
rural veterinary technicians
s are registered midwives, but they can also be:
s can help in this situation. You can set up either or both a:
s give you and your loved ones another layer of clarity.
s message on their next anniversary.
safeguarding people and property from the dangers of gas and electricity
school or educational institution
school term dates for New Zealand primary, intermediate and secondary schools.
screen and test blood donations, and
screen interactions (for example, clicking on web links)
screening with your first antenatal blood tests. Picking up
scripted and factual content for a variety of free-to-air television, digital and online platforms
search and rescue operations
search for organisations that can help your family.
search the PPSR to find out about any money owed on personal property
seasons of major symphonic repertoire
send you a certificate of registration.
serious offences such as rape and aggravated robbery
services, for example, selling coins and stamps, paying your bills
set policies for grants, and
set rating valuation standards and work with local government to ensure confidence in our rating valuation system
set the requirements for and approve initial teacher education programmes
set the standards for social investment practice to ensure consistency across government agencies and contracted providers
set up a trust and/or act as trustee
set, publish and update guidelines on law design and content
sets the direction and policy for the health system
setting exams for electrical workers
setting industry standards
setting standards for the Auditor-General
severe weather information, including official warnings
sewerage and drainage systems
sewerage treatment and disposal
show them each original photo ID.
show them your original photo ID.
showing an underline when you hover over navigation links
shown in Parliament and published on their website
sign language and English. The language is central to
sign the statutory declaration section of the application form to declare what you have said is true, and
small business and computing
social and community work
social work and human services
some Court-appointed liquidations.
some combination of these people.
some way for them to return your documents to you, like a self-addressed envelope.
something from as early in life as possible.
specialist healthcare provider that manufactures high technology medical devices, mainly artificial limbs, for individual patients with an integrated rehabilitation and coordination of care service.
specialist parliamentary procedure and legal advice
specified statutory officers and appointees to Independent Crown Entity boards
spelled with numbers or symbols (for example, V8).
sport science and human performance
spouse's birth certificate.
staff at the Department of Internal Affairs who administer the congratulatory message service
stand for parliament or local government
statutory declaration confirming your name change has been registered with Births, Deaths and Marriages.
stillbirth records that are at least 50 years old
stillbirth that occurred at least 50 years ago
stop illegal imports and exports through controls at borders
stopping or changing a grant
store and manage the nation's archives and library collections
stormwater and wastewater
student or tertiary identity card
supervise corporate managed funds.
supply a copy of the property
supplying NZ's money, eg notes and coins
supplying trusted and independent information through
support teachers, students and their families to raise educational achievement in schools
support tertiary education organisations to be accountable, self-improving and self-managing
support the development of efficient infrastructure
supporting innovation by funding research and technology development
supports government agencies and nationally significant organisations with tailored services and advice.
surgery to harvest your eggs.
survey our sea, providing official nautical charts and publications for safety at sea
sustainability and outdoor education
sustainable farming systems
sustainable regional development.
sustainable rural development
take over as main caregiver if something happens to you.
taking a pension overseas or getting an overseas pension
taking care of the regions harbours.
taking disciplinary action
technology (printing, photocopying and scanning services)
television, radio and film.
templates, either online or paper-based
that partners with private landowners to protect natural and cultural heritage sites on their land with covenants. A covenant is an agreement with a landowner to protect land forever. These covenants protect more than 180,000 ha of private land.
the Canterbury Earthquake National Memorial
the Crown to promote the knowledge and use of
the Department of Internal Affairs (on behalf of the Crown) licenses you to copy, distribute and adapt that content in accordance with the Creative Commons Attribution (CC-BY) 4.0 International Licence.
the External Reporting Board (
the FoodBowl located in Auckland
the FoodPilot located at Massey University near Palmerston North
the National Librarian is responsible for leading all National Library services in NZ.
the New Zealand Accounting Standards Board (
the New Zealand Auditing and Assurance Standards Board (
the Officers of Parliament Committee.
the Resource Management Act
the Sustainability Reporting Board (
the adoption is recognised under the Hague Convention, or by the Adoption Act 1955.
the amount to be repaid by somone granted legal aid
the birth certificate of your spouse's parent who was born in Samoa on or after 13 May 1924 and before 1 January 1949.
the building product certification scheme
the celebrant intentionally failed to send the paperwork to Births, Deaths and Marriages after the ceremony to register your marriage or civil union.
the celebrant made a serious legal error during your marriage or civil union ceremony
the celebrant's contact details, if you have them
the child was born outside New Zealand, and
the circumstances of you being a citizen by descent
the citizenship status of your adoptive parents at the time of your adoption.
the citizenship status of your biological parents at the time of your birth
the clinic where the donation happened.
the conditions placed on a grant
the cost of raising a child
the date and place of the marriage, or when and where it was intended to happen
the date and place you were married
the date and time you visited the site
the date of divorce if your marriage has been dissolved in NZ.
the date, year, or range of years to search
the delivery address and daytime contact number
the donor has asked for information about the donor-conceived person.
the donor-conceived person
the donor-conceived person shares a donor with another
the effectiveness, efficiency, and adequacy of approaches to mental health and wellbeing
the full names of the couple involved in the marriage or civil union
the gender you want on your citizenship certificate, and
the government agency that issued the original document
the government's health and disability policies
the maximum level of legal aid granted
the mayors of some cities.
the mental health and wellbeing of people in NZ
the name of the marriage or civil union celebrant
the name of the person who applied for your information
the name of the ship they arrived on
the outcome you are seeking.
the pages you visited on our site and the links you clicked on
the place where the event happened, and
the planning and commissioning of health services in NZ
the process of changing or cancelling an
the provision of goods and services.
the purpose of the initiative or trial, including the target audience
the quality and measurement of gas and electricity.
the referring site (if any) from which you clicked through to this site
the relevant application form.
the safety of electricity supply, and transmission generating systems
the safety of gas and electrical appliances and installations
the search terms you used
the signature and witness requirements
the specific goal being sought by linking from Govt.nz (such as seeking feedback on a trial, raising awareness as part of initial launch)
the tenants living in your house
the type of record (birth, death, marriage, civil union or name change)
the type of web browser you use, such as Chrome, Internet Explorer or Mozilla Firefox
the year of their birth, death, or marriage.
they are 15 or under, and
they were born here, they are a New Zealand citizen, or they are entitled to live here indefinitely.
think about what outcome or resolution you would like.
tips on how to talk with children
tips on what you need to check when you're hiring a tradesperson
to act on behalf of 109-plus
to be released on conditions.
to have someone appointed as your welfare guardian
to help reduce your legal costs.
to log securely into online services such as your Inland Revenue account, and to renew or replace your passport.
to manage your child support if your child is:
to protect their interests in case of incapacity.
to the end of the service
tobacco, such as cigarettes
tools for your money confidence and financial wellbeing
tourism, travel and hospitality.
tourism, travel and retail
trades and professional skills
training and seminars to help clients get up to speed quickly
training, seminars or work experience to build up confidence and skills
transitioning to more efficient, productive, safer agrifood systems.
transport for medical reasons.
transporting bulk electricity from where it's generated to cities and towns
travel overseas on a New Zealand passport
ultrasound scans to check your reproductive system
unable to complete the form because of a medical condition
under 18, or 18 and attending a registered school in
undergo several rounds of blood tests
underlining link text that appears in body copy so that people can scan and see them
understand from ethnic communities what they need to thrive and communicate this to government
understand the structure of government
understand what a decision is about
understand what could happen because of a decision made about their personal care and welfare
understanding of standards and commitments of the teaching profession
undertake mapping of outdoor public access
undertake workplace assessments and investigations to improve health and safety at work
universal newborn hearing screening.
used to be called Homecare Medical.
uses plain English for all Govt.nz content, with a Flesch reading ease score of at least 60
using overseas parental orders to get citizenship
usually live in New Zealand
utility bill (for example, gas, electricity, mobile phone)
vary or cancel any release conditions imposed
vehicles and child seat restraints
verify they are your parent, and
video filming of screen activity
wage subsidies to help with the costs of employing staff.
walkways, footpaths and streetlights
want the documents translated
was established as an independent statutory entity as required by
wastewater, stormwater and drinking water
water quality and water quantity management
water treatment and supply
water, wastewater and stormwater
website for support and information:
website to find out how to:
websites of government and non-government services
wedding anniversary (or any anniversary after a 70
weekly Best Start payments that you receive
went through the admission agreement with the manager
what to do with your cat if you cannot have it with you.
what your property managers need to report on to the Family Court
when and where the child was born, and
when and where you were born, and
where and when you were adopted
where and when you were born
where to locate a business, and
where we need roads, schools and hospitals
where you do and do not want to live
whether or not the application was granted.
who are in care or at risk of coming into care
who your welfare guardian is
why you want your child to be a New Zealand citizen
will let your employer or Work and Income know when and how much to take from your pay.
with government assistance before 1888
with your enduring power of attorney (
within the Department of Internal Affairs and came into effect on
words are used frequently in New Zealand. Learn some basic words, their meanings and hear how they are pronounced.
words you find. You can translate
work on the most common browsers, platforms and devices, and with assistive technologies.
work to improve the energy efficiency of New Zealand's homes and businesses
work to prevent crime before it happens
work with businesses, community groups, iwi and others to help them get involved in conservation
work with government agencies to support the delivery of quality services
work with other agencies and parties to improve workplace health and safety systems
work with other agencies to apply the social investment approach
work with other agencies to develop reform proposals.
work with people to find answers that reflect good faith and common sense
work with the Civil Aviation Authority and Aviation Security Service on air safety
work with the Pacific public and private sectors to strengthen commercial and trade relationships
work-related training, and
working with children, young people and their families
works across the government to improve outcomes for more than 1 million disabled people in New Zealand.
works out the amount and manages the payments.
works to help with the protection, wellbeing and prosperity of
works to prevent injuries from happening
workshops and masterclasses
workshops and practical advice for getting work
write the date and place they signed the documents, and
write the date they signed the photo.
write your full name, and
writing a complaint letter and sending this by fax, email or post.
you are a parent or guardian of a donor-conceived person who is aged 17 or under.
you are named on the register, and you are aged 18 or over
you both have to get independent legal advice
you can remarry or enter into a new civil union.
you have any concerns regarding your privacy.
you intend to marry outside New Zealand in accordance with the Foreign Marriage Acts 1892 to 1947 of the Parliament of the United Kingdom.
you need any content sent to you in a different format
you were born before 1 January 1949, and
you were born in the British Empire.
you were born outside New Zealand, and
you would like to access or change your personal information DIA has stored
you're 16 or 17 and have consent from all your guardians, and
your birth certificate or birth record
your child was born on or after
your citizenship or resident status (you must be a New Zealand citizen or entitled to live here indefinitely).
your current NZ driver licence
your current NZ passport, or
your current passport or photo ID
your dates and places of birth
your email address and phone number
your email or postal address
your expired NZ driver licence, as long as it did not expire more than 2 years ago
your face in a neutral expression, not smiling or frowning and with your mouth closed
your face looking directly at the camera
your full birth certificate with your parents' names
your full names before your marriage
your home address when you got married
your local Member of Parliament.
your marriage certificate
your mobile device is connected to a participating network (step 1),
your name and gender as recorded when you became a citizen
your operating system, for example Windows, MacOS
your original birth certificate
your parent or legal guardian, and
your parent was born in Western Samoa on or after 13 May 1924 and before 1 January 1949, and
your passport or travel document.
your passport, travel document, or state-issued ID
your preference to go into a care facility that allows residents to bring their pets
your signatures must be witnessed by a lawyer
your spouse's birth certificate, and
your will takes effect instead.
zoom in up to 400% without text spilling off the screen or having to scroll horizontally at small resolutions
